ॐ गुरुर् ब्रह्मा गुरुर् विष्णुः गुरुर् देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात् परं ब्रह्म तस्मै श्री गुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भव-रोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्ति ये नमः ॥
हरि ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः । हरि ॐ ॥
Main talk (English)
Vedas are the only pramāṇas for our self-realization. In the Veda stuti it is said:
“वेदोक्तकर्माणि शुभानि कृत्वा
वेदोक्तसर्वाणि फलानि लब्ध्वा ।
वेदान्तविज्ञानसुनिश्चितार्थाः
सर्वे भवामो भवतां प्रसादात् ॥.”
The meaning of this is: by practicing or doing the anuṣṭhānas as explained in the Vedas, we will obtain all the benefits, the puruṣārtha – dharma, artha, kāma – and with the knowledge we will also get the ultimate goal which is mokṣa.
For this anuṣṭhānam, the deha ārogyam is very important. “Dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣāṇām ārogyaṃ mūlam uttamam.” So Sūrya or Āditya upāsanā is critical for our deha ārogyam. We worship Āditya or Sun God or Sūrya Devatā daily in our sandhyā, sandhyāvandanam. So we say:
“असावादित्यो ब्रह्म ब्रह्मैवाहमस्मि ।.”
So Sūrya Bhagavān is the pratyakṣa devatā. He is the nourisher of the entire world. So Aruṇam is an important mantra to worship Sūrya Bhagavān. Aruṇam comes in the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam.
So we know Vedas are classified generally into three parts, right:
•	the Saṁhitā part, which is the mantra-rūpam of the Vedas,
•	then the Brāhmaṇam, which explains those mantras and how to use those mantras in anuṣṭhānam, like doing a Kuśmāṇḍa homa or a Rudra homa. So those Saṁhitā mantras are explained in the prayogam in the Brāhmaṇams.
•	And the final portion of it is Āraṇyakam, which is mostly the upāsanā mārga of those mantras: how do we internalize, how do we meditate upon those mantras in the Saṁhitā part.
So another way to look at this classification is śravaṇam, mananam, nididhyāsanam. Saṁhitā is mostly śravaṇam – you do adhyayanam, you listen and then you repeat, śravaṇam. Brāhmaṇam is you put those mantras into practice, which is more like mananam. And Āraṇyakam portion is: you internalize those mantras; you understand and then internalize, you meditate upon them, which is the upāsanā or the nididhyāsanam. And the end portion of Āraṇyakam is also called the Upaniṣads.
So Vedas, if you look at them, are also classified broadly into Veda-pūrva and Vedānta. The Veda-pūrva is the karma-kāṇḍam; Vedānta is the Upaniṣads. And the karma-kāṇḍam has the Saṁhitā, the Brāhmaṇam and the Āraṇyakam, and the end portion of the Āraṇyakam is the Vedānta or the Upaniṣads. That is how the classification is. And Aruṇam comes in the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam.
The Taittirīya Āraṇyakam has ten praśnams. Some people have classified this as eight prapāṭhakams. Praśnam or the prapāṭhakam is a chapter. So generally it is considered as ten praśnams, that’s how several people say it, but if you go and download Āraṇyakam in the Veda VMS website, it has eight prapāṭhakams – it has classified it differently.
So the first praśnam is Aruṇam; basically it is Aruṇa-ketuka chayanānam – that is what the first praśnam is called. And the second praśnam talks about svādhyāya brāhmaṇam, sandhyopāsanā mantras, rakṣā-guṇa mantras, Kuśmāṇḍa homa mantras, and all those mantras are explained in the second praśnam.
The third praśnam has the Aruṇa-ketuka chayana-vivaraṇam – chayana means the arrangement or preparation for the yajña: how do we arrange the bricks for doing a yajña, that is what chayana is all about – and it has pratigraha mantrams, brahma-medhā saṁskāra mantras etc. in the third praśnam.
The fourth praśnam is pravargya karma, which is used in Soma-yāgas, and Soma-yāgas mostly. And it also has pañca-śānti and ghoṣa-śānti mantras.
The fifth praśnam of the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam has pravargya brāhmaṇam; basically that explains the pravargya karma mantras given in the fourth praśnam.
The sixth praśnam has the aparakriyā mantras in the pitṛ-medha prayoga. Swami Omkārānanda says it is also called Kaṭu praśnam.
The seventh praśnam is what we all chant every day, which is the Śikṣāvallī. Eighth praśnam is the Ānandavallī. Ninth praśnam is the Bhṛguvallī. And tenth praśnam is the Mahā Nārāyaṇa Upaniṣad, also called as Nārāyaṇa-vallī.
So this is how this Taittirīya Āraṇyakam is arranged, and Aruṇam is the very first praśnam in the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam. And we will start looking more into this Aruṇam, with details on the mantras and how it is explained, what are the anuvākams in there, how many anuvākams, how many pañcatis are there in there. From the next recording, I will explain all those things.
Hari Om.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात् पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरि ॐ ।
श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः । हरि ॐ ॥

