ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।
गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
निधये सर्वविद्यानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।

In the last recording we saw that Aruṇam is coming as the first praśnam in the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam. Āraṇyakams are collection of mantras which are generally chanted or should be chanted in āraṇyam, in the forest. So in today’s parlance it will be, you know, a secluded and isolated place in your home. You know, after you withdraw from all your day to day activities, you find a small peaceful corner of your house, and then there you can sit and do the adhyayanam of the mantras. So Aruṇam is the first praśnam of the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam.
Now let us see why it is called as Aruṇam first. If you look at the Aruṇam, in the 131st pañcati it says: “Aruṇa kanda ṛṣayaḥ, āraṇye dhīrāḥ …”. So the ṛṣis who gave us these mantras are called as Aruṇaḥ. So that is why this is called as Aruṇam. And another interpretation is: Aruṇam talks about Aruṇa ketuka yajñam, so it is also called Aruṇam because of that.
Now, it also says in the pañcati it should be chanted in the āraṇyam – “āraṇye adhīrān” – it should be chanted in the forest. So that is why it is part of the Taittirīya Āraṇyakam.
And Aruṇam has 132 pañcatis. A pañcati is a group or collection of 50 words, more or less. Some pañcatis have more, some pañcatis have less, but in general it is 50 words. And each pañcati may not end in a proper sentence. It may have, you know, the word count or how it is divided; it may not have a full sentence at the end of a pañcati – it is possible.
And this is easier when you do practice, when you do adhyayanam or when you do abhyāsam. So when Ācārya teaches Veda or any of the Veda mantras, first he teaches once and then we repeat the mantra; that is called as chandai. After the chandai, we do practice it ourselves, which is called as tiruvai. So usually it is taught in pañcatis. So it is easier for us to remember that: every pañcati also they tell the start of the mantra and the number of words in that pañcati. So it is a way to remember, retain everything in our memory.
So Aruṇam has, as I said, 32 anuvākams, and these pañcatis are grouped into 32 anuvākams. Typically, when we chant Aruṇam, after end of every anuvākam we chant:
“श्री छाया सुवर्चला अम्बा समेत
श्री सूर्यनारायण स्वामिने नमः ।
ॐ नमो नारायणाय ॥ ।”
Śrī Chāyā Svarcalā Ambā sameta Śrī Sūrya Nārāyaṇa Svāmine namaḥ,
Om Namo Nārāyaṇāya – and then we offer namaskāras to the Sūrya Devatā. Some people also do at every pañcati, but generally it is at every anuvākam level. And people also chant, at the end of the Aruṇam, Surya Navagraha Sūktam, and some others also chant Āditya Hṛdayam as well. And that is depending on the parts of India, however they are practicing it. Based on their customs they do chant it differently.
So Aruṇam has, as I said, 32 anuvākams. The first six anuvākams explain Sun as a kāla-svarūpi. The seventh anuvākam onwards, the seventh anuvākam explains Sun in Aṣṭamūrti form. And it also describes the Mahā Meru. The eighth anuvākam talks about death and what are the ways to avoid them, how to avoid the death – it talks about that. Ninth anuvākam talks about the apamṛtyu – how can we live full life, how do we avoid untimely death – it talks about that. Tenth anuvākam explains the duals like day and night, hot and cold; it explains them as a Śiva Śakti dampati form. The 11th anuvākam talks about the Gāyatrī and Śrī Vidyā upāsanā. And 12th to 22nd anuvākams talk about different mantras, Rudra gaṇas, Bhūmadevī mantras, and end with the mantra-puṣpam. 23rd to the 26th anuvākam talks about the Aruṇa ketuka yajñam chayanam. The 27th to 31st anuvākam talks about mokṣa-sādhanaṃ and Vaiśravaṇa yajñam. The 32nd anuvākam concludes with Saṃvatsara vratam. That is how Aruṇam is arranged.
And the first praśnam starts with Bhadraṃ Karṇebhiḥ śānti mantra. Every praśnam has its own śānti mantra in the Āraṇyakam. So if you look at the Taittirīya Upaniṣad, which is seventh, eighth and ninth praśnam in Taittirīya Āraṇyakam, it starts with Saha nāv avatu śānti mantram. But Aruṇam starts with Bhadraṃ Karṇebhiḥ śānti mantram. And the same śānti mantram is repeated in the first pañcati of Aruṇam as well.
So we will see the full meaning in the next recording when we see the first pañcati, but I will give a little introduction to the śānti mantra. So the first time, the śānti mantra is asking for general peace or freedom from obstacles, praying for any obstacles to be removed – that is the first time we are chanting the śānti mantra. The second time, as part of the pañcati, we chant it very specifically for the Aruṇa ketuka chayanam or Aruṇa ketuka yajñam: “Let there be no obstacles when we are doing this anuṣṭhānam.” So that is why it is repeated the second time as part of the first pañcati.
Now, in general, the śānti mantra asks for three types of nivṛtti or nivāraṇam, freedom from obstacles. So there are three types.
One is ādhyātmikam – obstacles from ourselves, from our body, from our relatives. You could fall sick, your spouse could be sick; those things will impact how we do the adhyayanam or pārāyaṇam or any anuṣṭhānam. So we want any of those obstacles not to be there, so we ask for freedom from ādhyātmika obstacles.
The second form is ādhibhautikam – obstacles from our surroundings. See, typically if you are in āraṇyam, there could be animals that could harm you; there could be snakes, there could be insects. Or even if you are at home, you know, the lights can go when you start your pārāyaṇam – something like that, something not in your immediate control could go wrong. So we want anything – they are called as ādhibhautikam – we want to be free from those obstacles.
And the third one is ādhidaivikam – obstacles that are natural, like flood or lightning or bhūkampaṃ (earthquake). We do not have any control on them. So we are asking for peace or freedom from those obstacles that could impact our adhyayanam, our pārāyaṇam.
So these three together – ādhyātmikam, ādhibhautikam, ādhidaivikam – are called as tāpatrayam. So the śānti mantra is asking us to be, temporarily at least, free of these three obstacles until we conclude our anuṣṭhānam, our pārāyaṇam. That is the first time the śānti mantra is chanted. And we will see the details of each of these mantras as part of the first pañcati explanation in the next recording.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।

