गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।

We have seen the first pañcati in the last recording. Now let us chant the second pañcati.
अ॒ग्निर्वा॒युश्च॒ सूर्य॑श्च । 
स॒ह स॑ञ्च-स्क॒रर्धि॑या । 
वा॒य्वश्वा॑ रश्मि॒पत॑यः । 
मरी᳚च्यात्मानो॒ अद्रु॑हः । 
दे॒वी-र्भु॑वन॒ सूव॑रीः । 
पु॒त्र॒व॒त्वाय॑ मे सुत ।
Again here we are praising the waters.
We saw in the last Panchadi we collected all the waters, right?
So we said “Apamapa Mapas Sarvaha Asmad Asmadido Mutaha” – we collected all the waters from everywhere.

Now again, waters are very important for any Anushtanam and also for health.
So that's why we start first with waters, praising the waters or worshipping the waters.
Now without waters we can't do any Anushtanam or any pooja.

The first thing we do is Achamanam and then we do Sthala Shuddhi.
We do Kalasa Sthapanam, right?
And then we invoke the mantras or devatas in the kalasa itself and then we do pooja to that.

We do Varna Avahanam, we do Rudra Avahanam or any devata Avahanam.
We do in the kalasa water itself, right?
And then we do Shuddhi also – we do Punyahavachanam and then we do Shuddhi.

For everything we use waters.
So waters are very critical, very important for any pooja or any yagyam that we do.
That's why first we praise the waters and then we collect the waters.

So in the second Panchadi we are worshipping devatas like Agni, Vayu and Surya and then asking their blessings to collect these waters from everywhere.
That's where this second Panchadi comes.

So it says “Agnir Vayuscha Suryascha” – Agni, the fire god; Vayu, the wind god; and Surya, the sun, sun god.
Let Agni, Vayu, Surya bless us here.
Bless us for what? To collect those waters that we said in the previous Panchadi.

And we are asking their help.
“Saha Sanchaskara Dhiya” – why, what we are asking these gods?
With those waters that we collected, Saha – with them, together with the devatas, with Agni, Vayu, Surya, Agni Saha, Agni, Vayu, Surya devata Saha – “Sanchaskare”.

“Sanchaskare” means I'm going to do this yagyam, this Aruna Arunaketuka yagyam, with the waters, with the waters that we got.
I'm going to infuse mantra in those waters, I'm going to make it more energetic.
I'm going to perform this energetic yagya with the waters.

So please bless me – that's what we are going to ask, we are asking these gods.
For what? Riddhim, for Riddhya.
“Sanchaskara Dhiya Riddhya” means for abundance, for growth, for prosperity.

So with the help of the Agni, Vayu, Surya devata, after getting the waters, I will be performing this yagya with their blessings.
That's what this means: “Agnir Vayuscha Suryascha Saha Sanchaskara Dhiya”.

Now the next few mantras that come, we are praising those Jalabhimani devatas.

“Vayvasva Rashmi Pathayah” – Vayu: wind, we know the wind god Vayu.
Ashwaha: Vayvasva, Vayu Ashwaha, horses – Ashwa is horses.
And “Rashmi Pathayah”: Rashmi Pathayah is Pathi, Pathi, Pathayah is the lord of the rays.

Rashmi is the Surya, the rays of the sun.
So lord of the rays is Rashmi Pathayah, lord of the rays of the sun, Rashmi Pathayah.
So “Vayvasva Rashmi Pathayah”.

So here basically, when the waters are in a cloud form, they move around everywhere, right?
The wind moves them.
So it is compared like as if the water devatas are sitting on a horse, which is the horses are nothing but the Vayu.

Vayu Bhagwan is the horse here.
It's compared as if they are moving around – the Jalabhimani devatas moving around in a horse by Vayu.
And the sun rays are the protectors of those clouds; protectors of those clouds is the sun devata.

So the lights of the sun protect them; that's what they are saying here: “Vayvasva Rashmi Pathayah”.

Then the next mantra says “Marichyatmano Adrugaha”.
Adrugaha means harmless, beneficial, that doesn't harm anybody – Adrugaha.
So the waters don't harm anyone; they don't harm, they only bless us, they are very benevolent to us, right?

So those waters – Marichi.
Marichi is Agni again, another form of Agni.
Another, in the Dvadasa Aditya, form of Surya, Marichi is another name of Surya himself.

Agni – Agni is the atma in the waters.
So Agni is the atma in the waters, or the waters have Agni as their atma, that's what it means.
The waters have Agni as their atma.

That's very interesting – when you say Agni is in the waters, how is that possible?
So if you look at Tattva Bodha or Taitriya Upanishad, right?
We know there is this mantra in Tattva Bodha that says in the evolution of five elements it says:

“Tatha Akasaha Sambhutaha, Akasat Vayuhu, Vayostejaha, Tejasah Apaha, Adbhyah Prithvi.”

The same mantra also comes in Taitriya Upanishad:
“Akasat Vayuhu, Vayor Agnihi, Agner Apaha, Adbhyah Prithvi.”

There also the same mantra comes.
So from Akasha, Vayu came – “Akasat Sambhutaha Akasat Vayuhu”: from Akasha, the space, came Vayu, air.
From Vayu, Agni came; from Agni, the waters came – that's what the mantra says.

So that's what is also implied here.
So Agni is the atma in the waters.
Also, if you look at it in the evolution in Tattva Bodha – this, how the world evolved or the Panchabhootas came – in the evolution of that it says the process of evolution is called Panchikaranam.

It says the tamasic aspect of every gross element like space, air, fire, water and earth – all of them, one‑eighth of each one is in the other gross element.
For example, if you take water: water has half portion of it as water; one‑eighth of it is space; one‑eighth is air; one‑eighth is fire; and one‑eighth is earth.
So that's how the elements evolved; that's how it is explained in Tattva Bodha, it's called Panchikaranam.

So even by that way also we can say Agni or fire is also part of water, is in water.
So “Marichyatmanaha” – Marichi is the atma in the waters.

“Devi Bhuvana Suvarihi Devihi” – again here the Devihi is referring to the Jalabhimani devatas of the divine waters – that's what it is, the waters.
And you can compare this with our prokshana mantra in Sandhya Vandanam – we say “Apo Hishtamayo Bhuvastana Ujedadhadhana”.
There also we use, it's the same thing here.

So the Jalabhimani devatas, who have divine powers, are the goddesses.
“Bhuvana Suvarihi” – creators of this Bhuvanam, this earth, Bhuvanam.
Again, from the same Tattva Bodha we saw: “Adbhyah Prithvi” – from waters only the world came.

So they are the creators; waters are the source for the earth that we live in.
So “Devi Devi Bhuvana Suvarihi” – hey waters, you are the cause of this earth or this world that we live in.

“Putravatvayame Sutha” – Putravatvaya: Putravatvaya means for having, Putravatvaya – to be blessed with progeny, that's what Putravatvaya – to be blessed with progeny.
Me: to me or for me.
Sutha: please bless – Sutha means bless here; Sutha does not mean son here, Sutha means bless us.

So we are asking the waters to bless us with progeny.
Why? Just to do the Dharmanushtanam; the dharmam should continue.
So for that we need more progeny, so that, you know, they can carry on what we do to the next generation and generation and generation afterwards.

That's why we are asking the waters to bless us with progeny.
So we'll continue the other part in the next recording because it needs some more explanation for the other mantras.
So I will continue it in the next recording, and then we will summarize the whole Panchadi.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।



