ॐ
गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।
In the last recording we saw part of the second Panchadi.
We, meaning almost up to the three-fourth of the mantra, we have already seen up to “दे॒वी-र्भु॑वन॒ सूव॑रीः । पु॒त्र॒व॒त्वाय॑ मे सुत ”.
We have seen up to that.
So the meaning of what we have seen so far is: with the help of the Agni, Vayu and Surya Devatas, “अ॒ग्निर्वा॒युश्च॒ सूर्य॑श्च”, with the help of them, “स॒ह स॑ञ्च-स्क॒रर्धि॑या”, with the help, we will be doing Sanchaskara, we will do this Yagya, we will start this Parayanam, Aruna Parayanam or Aruna Ketuka Chayanam.
For Sanchaskara Ruddhaya, Ruddhaya means prosperity.
So for the prosperity, with the help of Agni, Vayu and Surya Devatas, with all the waters that we collected and with your blessings, we will do this Yagyam.
Hey harmless waters, “अद्रु॑हः ” — harmless is Adruga, we saw that “मरी᳚च्यात्मानो॒ अद्रु॑हः” — hey harmless waters, you travel fast like horses.
“वा॒य्वश्वा॑ रश्मि॒पत॑यः”; Vayvasva, like horses; Vayu Devata is like the horse, and protected by the rays of the Sun, रश्मि॒पत॑यः; and “मरी᳚च्यात्मानो॒ ” — Marichi is Agni, Agni as your Atma.
See, hey harmless waters, you travel fast like the horses and protected by the rays of Sun and with Agni Devata as your Atma.
And you are the cause of this universe, “दे॒वी-र्भु॑वन॒ सूव॑रीः”, and bless us with more Prajani, “पु॒त्र॒व॒त्वाय॑ मे सुत”, bless us with more Prajani.
That’s up to that we have seen.
Now the mantra continues with the next verse: “महानाम्नी-र्म॑हामा॒नाः”.
So “Mahanamnihi” means water is called in several names, is praised in several names, like in “Apaha” — Apa is water; “Jalam”, “Udakam”, “Kam”, “Salilam”, “Kashta”, “Arnavam”, “Samudram”; Arnavam, it is also water, it is a different name.
So we have several names, we invoke waters, we praise waters, that is what “Mahanamnihi” is.
“Mahamanaha” — it is always praised.
I mean, we always do water as the first step in any puja or any Yagya; as I said before, we always invoke all the Devatas in the waters only.
So Mahamanaha — waters are worshipped very highly, worshipped, revered, worshipped greatly, honored, Mahamanaha.
“महानाम्नी-र्म॑हामा॒नाः । म॒ह॒सो म॑हस॒-स्स्वः॑”.
“Mahaso Mahasaha” means any Devata puja that we do, you know, for any Devata, like if you do a Vishnu puja or a Varuna puja or Shiva puja, any puja we do, we invoke all those Devatas in the Kalasam, in the water only.
Right? Now it doesn’t matter which Devata puja we are going to do, but we always need water.
So for that Devata puja, even though we are doing any Rupam or any Devata puja, we still use the same water.
That is what “म॒ह॒सो म॑हस॒-स्स्वः॑” — for any puja that we do, Mahaso Mahasaha, any Devata puja we do.
“Swaha” — so the water itself, the water basically represents that Devata and we worship the Devata in that waters only, Swaha.
So through you only, you are the real, you represent the real Devata — “म॒ह॒सो म॑हस॒-स्स्वः॑”, that is what it is, “म॒ह॒सो म॑हस॒-स्स्वः॑ । दे॒वीः प॑र्जन्य॒ सूव॑रीः”.
“Devi” again, the Jalabhimana Devatas, the waters.
“प॑र्जन्य॒ सूव॑रीः” — previously we saw it is “Bhuvanasurihi”, cause of the Bhuvanam, earth itself; here it is Parjanyasurihi.
Parjanya is the clouds, the rain clouds basically, or who is the source of rain.
That is Parjanyasurihi.
So you are the sources of the rain.
“पु॒त्र॒व॒त्वाय॑ मे सुत” — O waters who are the sources of the rain, please bless us with progeny.
So if you look at the mantra from “महानाम्नी-र्म॑हामा॒नाः । म॒ह॒सो म॑हस॒-स्स्वः॑ । दे॒वीः प॑र्जन्य॒ सूव॑रीः । पु॒त्र॒व॒त्वाय॑ मे सुत ॥”, what it means is: you are greatly praised, Mahamanaha, in different names, Mahanamnihi, and through you, Swaha, through you only we can do all the Devata pujas, “Mahaso Mahasa Mahaso Mahasaha”.
O waters who are the sources of rain, Parjanyasurihi, please bless us with more progeny, “Putravatvaya Me Suta”.
So that is what this second Panchadi is, praying to the waters.
So again, if you look at the complete gist of the mantras or the meaning of this second Panchadi: with the help of Agni, Vayu and Surya Devatas we will get the waters, or the waters we got previously, with the blessings of these Devatas, we will do this great Yagya, Aruna Ketuka Chayanam, for prosperity, Ruddhaya.
Hey harmless waters, you travel fast like horses and are protected by the rays of Sun, with Agni Devata as your Atma.
You are the cause of this universe and bless us with more Prajani so that we can carry on the Dharma.
You are greatly praised in different names and through you we worship all the Devatas.
O waters who are the sources of rain, please bless us with more Prajani.
So up to this we are praising the waters now.
Now in the third Panchadi onwards we are going to do more praising the waters, and we are going to ask them to remove some obstacles that we may have, we are going to pray to the waters more.
We just praised them; now we are going to ask favors from the waters in the next Panchadi onwards.
We will see that in the next recording.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।


