ॐ गुरुर् ब्रह्मा गुरुर् विष्णुः गुरुर् देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात् परं ब्रह्म तस्मै श्री गुरवे नमः ॥

गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भव रोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यनाम् दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥

अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्यां नमः ॥

In the last recording we have seen the meaning of first four lines of the third Panchati.
Now we will see the next four lines and the other mantras in the third Panchati.

वज्र॑-न्दे॒वीरजी॑ताग्​श्च । 
भुव॑न-न्देव॒सूव॑रीः । 
आ॒दि॒त्यानदि॑ति-न्दे॒वीम् । 
योनि॑नोर्ध्व-मु॒दीष॑त ।

First let us see the meanings of every word and then we will try to understand them together, these four lines.

“वज्र॑-न्दे॒वीरजी॑ताग्​श्च” – Vajram: Vajram here is the weapon of Lord Indra and here this means the thunderbolt.
Some also compare this to the rainbow.
“Devihi” – O Jalabhimani Devatas, Devihi.

“Ajita Gashcha” – Ajitaha, Ajitan: unconquerable, victorious.

“भुव॑न-न्देव॒सूव॑रीः” – Bhuvanam: this is the world that we live in, the world.
“Deva Suvarihi”: similar to what we saw before, “Parjanya Suvarihi” – we saw that, the causes of the rain clouds.
What are the causes of the rain clouds? Here waters are the cause or the sustaining force of the Devas – Deva Suvarihi.

“आ॒दि॒त्यानदि॑ति-न्दे॒वीम्” – Adityan: Adityan here means not the Dvadasa Adityas.
They are also Devatas, but it means the Devatas from Aditim Devi, from Aditi Devi.
Aditi Devi is the wife of Kashyapa Maharishi and from this couple we got the Devatas, all the Devatas were born.

So that’s why they are called Adityaha – Kashyapa and Aditi Devi’s sons are called Adityaha.
And Kashyapa and Diti Devi, their sons are called Daitya, Daityaha, Rakshasas.
So the father is the same, Kashyapa Maharishi is the same, but from Aditi, Devatas; and from Diti all the Daityas or Rakshasas were born.

Here the Adityan means the Devatas, not the Dvadasa Adityas.

“योनि॑नोर्ध्व-मु॒दीष॑त” – Yonina: to protect us.
Urdvam: upward, sky, akasha.
Udishata: keep it, place it above, keep it up, Udishata.

That’s the meaning of word by word for these four lines.
Now let us put them together to understand what we are praying.

O waters, Jalabhimani Devatas, Deva Devihi, who are the sustaining forces in the Devatas – Deva Suvarihi – and the Bhuvanam, for this world.
So the waters are the sustaining forces for this world we live in and also for the Devatas.

Please place – Udishata – the Vajram, the Ayudham, the rainbow or the thunderbolt, in the sky – Urdvam – to protect us – Yonina.
Make us also unconquerable – Ajitan – by our enemies, the Rakshasas we prayed before, you know, drive away the Rakshasas.

Let all the Devas of the mother Aditi Devi – Aditim Devi – all the Devatas, Adityan, let them all watch over us from above – Udishata.
We already said Udishata is keep it or place it above; from above, Udishata, watch over us from above – Urdvam, Urdvam – to protect us, Yonina, to protect us.

So, waters, please protect us from above along with the Devatas of Aditi Devi, using the Vajram, the Ayudham, using that, please protect us from above.
That’s what this means.

So we have asked the Devatas in the Shanti mantra also, right?
We have prayed to Indra, we have prayed to Tarkshya, we have prayed to Brihaspati for general no obstacles to do this any karma.
That’s why we prayed in the Shanti mantra.

But here we are asking specifically protection from the Rakshasas or removing our obstacles to continue with the Yagya and those things.
That’s what we are praying very specifically in these mantras.

The next four mantras are going to conclude worshipping of waters and praising them.

शि॒वा न॒-श्शन्त॑मा भवन्तु । 
दि॒व्या आप॒ ओष॑धयः । 
सु॒मृ॒डी॒का सर॑स्वति । 
मा ते॒ व्यो॑म स॒न्दृशि॑ ॥ 3 ॥

Again, let’s see the meaning word by word first and then we will look at the overall meaning.

“शि॒वा न॒-श्शन्त॑मा भवन्तु” – Shivaha: auspicious.
Naha: for us, to us.
Santamaha: peaceful, sukham, giving happiness, giving Santamaha.
Bhavantu: let them be, may be, may let them be, Bhavantu.

“दि॒व्या आप॒ ओष॑धयः” – Divyaha: divine, heavenly.
Apaha: waters.
Oshadayah: herbs, medicinal plants or herbs.

“सु॒मृ॒डी॒का सर॑स्वति” – Sumrutika: very gracious, kind, or again happiness-giving, similar to what we saw, Santamaha, same meaning almost.
Saraswati: Saraswati here could mean two things.

One is the Devata who is the goddess of speech, wisdom.
So we are praying to get a good Vakshakti so that we can chant the mantras properly – one way it can be taken.

But since we are praying to waters, Saraswati can also mean the waters because Saras means lake, and Saraswati from that – Saraswati – means could be the goddess of the lakes or the lakes, the waters itself can be called as Saraswati.

So in this four, and we have one more:

“मा ते॒ व्यो॑म स॒न्दृशि॑ ” – Ma: not, may not.
Te: your.
Vyoma: Vyoma means sky, the vast sky, that’s what Vyoma means.
Sandrishi: seen, Sandrishi – seen, seeing, seen.

So what we are asking in these four mantras is: we pray to the divinely waters to remove all sorrows and give us sukham, Sumrutika, Santama.
To bless the surroundings, the plants, the herbs that we depend on – the surroundings – bless them so that, you know, there is no dearth of it, that we get what we need.

And it prays to Saraswati, the goddess of river, to bless us and be with us the entire time.
So it says “Mate Vyoma Sandrishi”; literally it means let the gap between us, between us and the Devatas, be never seen, be never seen, be not visible.

What that means is that you always watch over us.
You never, there is an interruption; you always protect us, continuously protect us, that’s what “Mate Vyoma Sandrishi” means.

And so with this, in the third Panchati, through the Jalabhimani Devatas we have worshipped Surya Devata; through them we have worshipped Surya Devata only.
And we have asked those waters to protect us while doing this Yagya and remove any obstacles on the way.

So with this Anuvakam, with this Panchadi, the first Anuvakam is over.
So we have mostly used waters, prayed to the waters only in this first Anuvakam.

We have not even worshipped Surya yet, or we have not seen any mantra addressing directly the Surya Devata.
But here, you know, even though we are worshipping waters, actually the end result is we are worshipping Surya only.

We already saw that “Agnerapaha” – from Agni only waters came.
So worshipping the waters indirectly is worshipping the Surya Devata only.

And so with this the first Anuvakam is over.
Now we will start with the second Anuvakam and see what it says.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात् पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ।
हरिः ॐ ।
श्रीगुरुभ्यो नमः ।
हरिः ॐ ॥