गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।

So far we have seen the first Anuvakam with three Panchadis where we have worshipped, prayed to Surya Devata through the waters.
Now from the second Anuvakam to sixth Anuvakam, Surya is described as a Kala Swarupi.
So the second Anuvakam has fourth, fifth, sixth and seventh Panchadis in it.

Now let us look at the fourth Panchadi where Surya is explained as the cause of the Vyavaharika Kalam.
Now let me first chant the mantras.

स्मृतिः॑ प्र॒त्यक्ष॑-मैति॒ह्य᳚म् । अनु॑मान-श्चतुष्ट॒यम् । 
ए॒तैरादि॑त्य मण्डलम् । सर्वै॑रेव॒ विधा᳚स्यते । 
सूर्यो॒ मरी॑चि॒माद॑त्ते । सर्वस्मा᳚-द्भुव॑नाद॒धि । 
तस्याः पाक वि॑शेषे॒ण । स्मृ॒त-ङ्का॑ल वि॒शेष॑णम् ॥ 
न॒दीव॒ प्रभ॑वा-त्का॒चित् । अ॒क्षय्या᳚-थ्स्यन्द॒ते य॑था ॥ 4 ॥

Smriti Pratyaksham Aidihyam Anumanas Chatushtayam.

Smritihi.Smritihi means Dharma Shastram given by the Rishis.
So we have Manusmriti, we have Parasara Smriti etc.

Literally Smriti means memory, memory.
But here the Smriti is what the Rishis have given us.

Pratyaksham.
Pratyaksham means direct perception that we can directly see with our Indriyas, direct perception.
But here Pratyaksham indicates the Vedas, the Shruti that we hear; Shruti which is a Pratyaksham.

Aidihyam.
Aidihyam is Itihasam, Puranam, that is Aidihyam.

Smriti Pratyaksha Maidihyam Anumanas Chatushtayam.

Anumanah.
Anumanah means inference, inference deriving from the other Pramanams, inference.

Chatushtayam, fourfold, the four.
What are the four? Smritihi, Pratyaksham or Shrutihi, Aidihyam which is Itihasam or Puranam, and Anumanam, Anumanah.

These four, it is saying here, the fourfold, they are the Pramanams, Sadhanams for understanding the truth.
That's what these two lines mean, two mantras mean.

Now let us look at the other two and then we will put them all together.

ए॒तैरादि॑त्य मण्डलम् । सर्वै॑रेव॒ विधा᳚स्यते ।

Etehi Sarvaihi Eva.
Etehi, the next line, Sarvaihi Eva, Sarvaihi Reva, Etehi Sarvaihi Eva – indeed by these four only, the four that were told in the previous mantra.

Aditya Mandalam – the solar orb, the sun sphere, solar orb.
Vidasyate. Vidasyate means is known, is understood.

So by these four Pramanams or Chatushtaya that were mentioned in the previous two mantras, only through that, only through that, Eva – only by that – we can understand the Aditya Mandalam.

So in these four mantras or lines it says there are things that we cannot directly understand using our Indriyas.
Things are not possible for direct perception, but can only be understood through these fourfold Pramanams, the Chatushtayam – Smritihi, Shrutihi, Puranam Itihasam and Anumanam.

These are the four tools that we can use to understand any truth.
So here the Aditya Mandalam is going to be described because it is not available for our direct perception by our Indriyas.

So Arunam is explaining.
Arunam is now here a Pramanam which is a Pratyaksham because it is in the Vedas, Shruti Pramanam.
Through this we are going to understand; this is going to explain how the Aditya Mandalam is established.

Let's look further in the mantras.

सूर्यो॒ मरी॑चि॒माद॑त्ते । सर्वस्मा᳚-द्भुव॑नाद॒धि ।
Suryah, the sun.
Marichim; Marichi, we already have seen it; Marichi is the ray, beam of light from the sun, sun’s rays.
Adatte. Adatte means taking, receiving.

Sarvasmat – from all.
Bhuvanat – Sarvasmat Bhuvanat, from all the worlds.
Adhi – above.

So Suryah, or Surya, shines his rays from above the world.
That's what this means: Suryah Marichim Adatte Sarvasmat Bhuvanat Adhi – from all the worlds, from above, above all the worlds, the sun rays are shining, he shines those sun rays.

तस्याः पाक वि॑शेषे॒ण । स्मृ॒त-ङ्का॑ल वि॒शेष॑णम् ॥ 
Tasyah. Tasyah – of that, of that rays, beam of light from sun, sun’s rays.
So “Tasyah Paka Visheshana”.

Paka Visheshana – Paka literally means cooking.
Paka; Pakashala we call kitchen, is called as Pakashala.

So here the cooking means the heat of these rays, sun rays, transforms subject on which it falls, on things it falls; that is Paka Visheshana – by the heat of the sun rays.
That's what it literally means – by the heat of the sun rays, Paka Visheshana, that some transformations happen on anything where it falls.

Smritam – is known, Smritam – is considered, is called, is known, is understood.

Kala Visheshanam – here the time is understood by those transformations because of sunlight; that's Kala Visheshanam.
Paka Visheshana, Kala Visheshanam Smritam – because of the transformation by the rays of sun, change in time also is understood.

That's what this means.
So if you look at it, when the sun rays shine or fall on things, plants grow because of that, right?
From seed to a plant, from plant to a tree, everything needs the heat, the energy, which all is derived from the sun.

So that's the transformation here, Paka Visheshana.
And because of that we recognize the seasons.
If you look at summer, we say summer; summer, the light rays are very hot.

So when it is very hot we say it is summer.
When it is very cold we call it winter.
So because of the Paka Visheshana, because of the nature of the light, we identify the seasons – that is Kala Visheshanam Smritam.

That's how we understand it.
So Surya is considered here the cause of those Vyavaharika Kala.

So Kala is of two types.
Kalam is absolute Kalam which is without any Upadhis – that is absolute, which we don't experience, we don't see that.

Whereas what we see on the earth is with Upadhi.
So the seasons that we see here may not be the same on another planet because the Upadhis are different there.

So that's why what we see here is Vyavaharika Kalam – that is Kalam with any Upadhis.
So sun is the cause of those Upadhis.

He is the one who makes those Kala Visheshanam like summer, winter, all those things happen because of the sun rays.
That's what it says here.

न॒दीव॒ प्रभ॑वा-त्का॒चित् । अ॒क्षय्या᳚-थ्स्यन्द॒ते य॑था ॥
Nadi Iva – like a river, Nadi Iva, like a river.
Prabhavat. Prabhava means it's coming from its source – Prabhavat, flows from its source, Prabhavat.

Kachit – some river, Kachit, some river.
Akshaya. Akshaya means imperishable, inexhaustible, always flowing, never dries – Akshaya.

Atha – then, then or thus, Atha.
Syandate. Syandate means flows, is streaming, water streaming, flows.

Yatha – just as, just as, Yatha Syandate, Yatha, just like that.

So just like how a river flows from its inexhaustible source, it always streams, always comes, Kala comes from sun.
The Vyavaharika Kala, when we say Vyavaharika Kala, comes from the sun.

It never ends, never ends; imperishable, Akshaya – it always comes and goes.
The night comes means followed by night is day; followed by day is night; it's the cycle, always continues.

There's no end to this – that's what this means.
Just like, just like how a river from its source, inexhaustible source, flows, Kala flows from Surya.

That's what this fourth Panchadi says.
Now from the fifth Panchadi we will see more details about this Kala.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।
