गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।
​
Let us continue with the fifth, fifth Panchadi in the second Anuvakam.
Let me chant the fifth Panchadi first.
​
तान्नद्यो-ऽभि स॑माय॒न्ति । सो॒रु-स्सती॑ न नि॒वर्त॑ते ।
 ए॒वन्ना॒ना स॑मुत्था॒नाः । का॒ला-स्सं॑​वँथ्स॒रग्ग्​ श्रि॑ताः । 
अणुशश्च म॑हश॒श्च । सर्वे॑ समव॒यन्त्रि॑ तम् । स तै᳚-स्स॒र्वै-स्स॑मावि॒ष्टः । 
ऊ॒रु-स्स॑न्न नि॒वर्त॑ते । अधिसं​वँथ्स॑रं-विँ॒द्यात् । तदेव॑ लक्ष॒णे ॥ 5 ॥

Let us see the line by line meaning now.

तान्नद्यो-ऽभि स॑माय॒न्ति 
Taan Nadyah Abhi Samayanti.
​
Taan or Tam, to that, into that, that big river, the river that we saw in the previous fourth Panchadi.

We saw the river, it said in there, the fourth Panchadi we saw that Nadiva Pravat Kajit Akshayaat Syandhate Yatha, that river which is flowing, which is flowing forward, streams forward, that river it's talked about here.

Tam, into that river, Nadyah small rivers, Nadyah small rivers, Abhi Samayanti, they all merges into, come into Abhi Samayanti, from all sides, from all sides, small rivers from all sides merges into the big river.

तान्नद्यो-ऽभि स॑माय॒न्ति । सो॒रु-स्सती॑ न नि॒वर्त॑ते ।
Sa, that big river, Urusati, with all the small rivers merging into that, Urusati means becoming vast, wide, with the small Nadi, small rivers merging into this big one, it becomes wide, very vast.
​
Na Nivartate, doesn't turn back, doesn't cease, does not turn back, Na Nivartate.
So means it's with, with rivers merging into that, the big river becomes very wide and flows fast, flows forward, Na Nivartate, it doesn't turn back at all, doesn't come back at all.

 ए॒वन्ना॒ना स॑मुत्था॒नाः
​Evam, in that way, Nanah Samutthanah, various, manifold, Samutthanah, originating, arising, Samutthanah means originating, arising, various, manifold, Nanah Samutthanah, arising.
​
 का॒ला-स्सं॑​वँथ्स॒रग्ग्​ श्रि॑ताः.
Kalah Samvatsaram Shrudhah, the various units of time, Kalah, time, divisions of time, Samvatsaram, Samvatsaram is the year, Shrutahah, rest upon, depend upon.
​
So Evam Nanah Samutthanah Kalah Samvatsaram Shrudhah.

Evam, in the similar way, similar way of what, like how the river, small rivers merges into the big river, Evam, like that, Nanah Samutthanah Kalah, the smaller units of time that comes and goes, like the Kshanam, Nimisham etc.

There are smaller units of time, divisions of time, Masam, Paksham, all those things, divisions of time, all those divisions of time, they, they come and then they go, they come and go.
So like how a small river comes, these smaller units of Kalas come into the Samvatsaram or they merges into or rest upon, Shrutahah, rest upon into the Samvatsaram, the year.

अणुशश्च म॑हश॒श्च । सर्वे॑ समव॒यन्त्रि॑ तम् 
​Anusaschmagasasch, Anusasch, Anusahah, Anusahah cha Mahasahah cha, Anusahah is smaller units of time, that is the Kshanam—
Nimisham etc. Smaller divisions.
​Mahasahah is the bigger divisions of time like Paksham, Masam, Ritus etc.

Those are all bigger units of time.
Both Anusasch Mahasasch, both those small and bigger units of divisions of time, Sarve Samavayantritam, Sarve, all of them, all those small and big, Samavayantri means they all come together, similar, like, like merging, but it's, it's Samavayantri, they all come together into the Samvatsaram, Tam Samavayantri Tam.
Tam here means the Samvatsaram.

They all come into the Samvatsaram, merges into the, or they all come together and come together into the Samvatsaram.

स तै᳚-स्स॒र्वै-स्स॑मावि॒ष्टः, Satai Sarve Samavishtah.
Sah, Sah again that Samvatsaram, Sarvaihi Taihi, all those Kalas, the smaller units of Kalas, small means small and the big, not small alone, just the Anusasch Mahasasch, both small and big, Sarvaihi Taihi, all those divisions of Kalas, Samavishtahah, the, the Samvatsaram encompasses all those units of time, the small or big, they all is encompassed, all rest upon into the Samvatsaram.
​
ऊ॒रु-स्स॑न्न नि॒वर्त॑ते, Urusann, Urusann is similar to the Urusati we saw in the, the second mantra, in the second line, Urusann, becomes vast.
​Now with all the smaller units of time, the divisions of time merging into the Samvatsaram, the Samvatsaram becomes vast, big.

Na Nivartate, also it also continuously flows forward, it doesn't turn back, Na Nivartate.
So the Samvatsaram encompasses, are filled with those small and big units of divisions of time and it becomes vast and never ends and never turns back, goes back.
Just it is compared with how the river becomes very vast or wide with all the small rivers merging into it.
It's just compared with that.

 अधिसं​वँथ्स॑रं-विँ॒द्यात्
Adhisamvatsaram Vidyat, Vidyat, one should know, one should understand, Vidyat, Adhisamvatsaram, Samvatsaram, year, Adhi Samvatsaram here means the supervising deity of the year, of the Samvatsaram, Adhisamvatsaram Tat Eva Lakshane, through that, through that, through what, Lakshane, these characteristics, the characteristics or mark of time, the divisions of time that we saw like Anusasch Mahasasch, the smaller units of time and the bigger units of time and all of them becoming into the Samvatsaram, these characteristics of time, through this, through this one should understand Sun is the supervising deity, Adhisamvatsaram of Kala.
​
So Sun should be understood as the Adhidevata of Samvatsaram through these divisions of time.

So in essence this fifth Panchadi says like how all small rivers flow into one river and makes that an, a very big stream of continuously flowing big river, the many divisions of time, like small like Kshanam, Nimisham, or the bigger units like the Paksham or Masam, they all contained in an year or merges into the Samvatsaram, the year, and makes it vast, makes it big.
​
And just like the river which continuously flows and never turns back, the Kala also continuously flows forward, never turns back.
And through this characteristics of the Kala one should understand Sun is the supervising deity of Samvatsaram, of the year, the presiding deity or Adhidevata of the Samvatsaram.
That's what this fifth Panchadi is conveying to us.

We'll see more about the Kalas in the next Panchadi onwards.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।