गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

Let us look at the sixth Panchadi now.
​
अणुभिश्च म॑हद्भि॒श्च । स॒मारू॑ढः प्र॒दृश्य॑ते । 
सं​वँथ्सरः प्र॑त्यक्षे॒ण । ना॒धिस॑वः प्र॒दृश्य॑ते । 
प॒टरो॑ विक्लि॑धः पि॒ङ्गः । ए॒त-द्व॑रुण॒ लक्ष॑णम् । 
यत्रैत॑-दुप॒दृश्य॑ते । स॒हस्र॑-न्तत्र॒ नीय॑ते । 
एकग्ं हि शिरो ना॑ना मु॒खे । कृ॒थ्स्न-न्त॑दृत॒ लक्ष॑णम् ॥ 6 ॥

Now let us see the line by line meanings.

अणुभिश्च म॑हद्भि॒श्च
It is again similar to what we saw in the fifth Panchadi, Anusasch Bhagasasch, same idea here.

Anubihi Cha Magadbhihi Cha.
Anubihi, the smaller unit of time like Kshanam, Nimisham etcetera.
Magadbhihi, the bigger units like Paksham, Masam etcetera, see the smaller and the bigger units of time.
Samaroodha Pradrisyate, Samaroodha Pradrisyate.
Samaroodha, together with them, with the small and big units of time, Pradrisyate, seen, visible.

What is seen?
सं​वँथ्सरः प्र॑त्यक्षे॒ण
The Samvatsaram, the year, the year together with the small and bigger units of time, is directly seen, perceived by us, Pratyakshena, directly, we are able to perceive it, experience it.
​
ना॒धिस॑वः प्र॒दृश्य॑ते, Na Adisatvaha Pradrisyate or Adisatvaha Na Pradrisyate.
Adisatvaha, Adisatvaha is the truth behind, the underlying substance, the underlying truth, the cause.

So we see the Samvatsaram with our eyes, we experience it, but we don't experience or we don't see the truth or the cause behind the Samvatsaram, which is the Kala Purushaha or the Paramatma.

We don't see that, we just experience the Samvatsaram only, we just stop that.
That's what it says here, Adisatvaha Na Pradrisyate, it's not seen, we are not able to see the underlying cause.

प॒टरो॑ विक्लि॑धः पि॒ङ्गः, Patarah Viklidah Pingah.
Patarah means literally clothing.
The cloth we put on is to cover our body, to protect our body, we use the clothings to protect our body.

Similarly it is, that is this mantra the Bhashyakara compares it to the eyes basically that sees the sun or that sees or experiences the Samvatsaram.
​They say here the Patarah here means the eyelids that protects the eyes, that protects the eyes, similar to a clothing protecting the body.
Viklidah, Viklidah means moist, wet, the eyes are always wet, moist.
Pingah, Pingah, Pingalah, Pingah is reddish brown, golden brown color.
That's the literal meaning, but let us look at the other line also and then we'll see them together.

ए॒त-द्व॑रुण॒ लक्ष॑णम्
Etat, this, Varuna, Varuna, Lord of waters, God of rain, God of all the waters, Varuna.
Lakshanam is characteristic or sign, mark.

So what it is saying here is प॒टरो॑ विक्लि॑धः पि॒ङ्गः । ए॒त-द्व॑रुण॒ लक्ष॑णम् । ​

The eyes that we sees the sun, right, the sun who shines like reddish brown, with reddish brown color or golden brown color, we see that sun with our eyes, Pratyakshena, we see directly, we perceive, we see it and we take that as the cause of or the source of Kala, Samvatsaram, we already saw that in the previous Panchadi that Surya is the cause of the Samvatsaram.
​
But what it says is this eyes are the one that covers us from seeing the truth behind the visible sun, the Kala Purusha or the Paramatma.

It says this eyes are covered, Etat Varuna Lakshanam means it is covering these, we don't, the eyes don't able to see the truth behind, the underlying truth, Adisatvaha, the underlying truth behind this Samvatsaram, we are not able to see that.
​
That's what this literally or the Bhashyakaras interpret these two mantras that way.

यत्रैत॑-दुप॒दृश्य॑ते 
Yatra, where, Etat, this or this world, Upadrisyate, is perceived or observed.
Yatre Tatupadrisyate, Yatra Etat Upadrisyate, where this world is perceived through our physical eyes indeed, so where we perceive this world.
Sahasrantatraniyate, Sahasram Tatraniyate.

Sahasram, a thousand, here literally represents the column with many fold divisions of time.
​Sahasram is thousand literally, it means thousand, but the interpretation here is it many divisions of time, many of them.

स॒हस्र॑-न्तत्र॒ नीय॑ते , Tatra, there again in the world, Tatra, there in the world, Niyate, is led, is, Niyate is leading, led or record.

So through our physical eyes, where we see or perceive the world, the many divisions of time is record or known.
But we don't see again the Paramatma or the Kala Purusha who is behind it.

यत्रैत॑-दुप॒दृश्य॑ते स॒हस्र॑-न्तत्र॒ नीय॑ते .
So we just literally see the Samvatsaram only, so we see the many folds of small and greater units of time, but we don't see the Kala Purusha behind all those, behind the Samvatsaram.

एकग्ं हि शिरो ना॑ना मु॒खे । कृ॒थ्स्न-न्त॑दृत॒ लक्ष॑णम्, Ekamhi Siro Nana Mukhe.
​
Ekam, one, only one, one Hi, indeed, Ekamhi, indeed only one.
Siraha, head, Siraha is head.
Nana, many, manifold, various.
Mukhe, Mukaha, Mukham, face.

So here it says the Kala Purusha is described here, the Kala Purusha has head, Samvatsaram as the head, Siraha is the Samvatsaram is compared to the Siras of the Kala Purusha, has Samvatsaram as his head and Nana Mukhe, Nana Mukhe is many faces it says here, but the Bhashyakara says two faces, many is two here.

The faces, what are the, who, what are the faces for the Kala Purusha?
Uttarayanam, Dakshinayanam.
The Ayanams are the face of the Kala Purusha.

So he has indeed one head with two faces, that's what this says, Ekamhi Siro Nana Mukhe.
कृ॒थ्स्न-न्त॑दृत॒ लक्ष॑णम् 
Krishnam means complete, whole, complete.
​Krishnam Tatu Ritu Lakshanam.
Tatu, that, Ritu, Ritus are the seasons, right.
So we have Hemanta Ritu, Shishira Ritu, Greeshma Ritu, like that, so we have Ritus are there and two months are in one Ritu.
So we have six Ritus, that makes one Samvatsaram.
So the Ritus, seasons, Lakshanam are sign, characteristics, mark.
Krishnam Tadrudu Lakshanam, that is the complete sign of the seasons.
So literally it means, so these two mantra if we take together, Ekamhi Siro Nana Mukhe Krishnam Tadrudu Lakshanam, what does it mean?

The Kala Purusha has Samvatsaram as his head and the Ayanams, Dakshinayanam, Uttarayanam as his face and he is complete with the Ritus as his characters, Ritus as his characters.
So if you recall in the fourth Panchadi we saw the Chatushtayam, right, Smriti, Shruti, Pratyaksham and Anumanam, the fourfold and those, that is the only way to understand the truth, that's what we saw.
So in this Panchadi it explains the limitations of what we see with our eyes, that the direct perception, what we see with our eyes, what we experience or we perceive daily, what we see, it shows the limitations here.

So we see or we experience or we perceive the Samvatsaram with the divisions of small and big time, right, units of time like Kshanam, Nimisham, Paksham, Masam etcetera.
But our physical eyes cannot reveal us the Kala Purusha, the Adisatvaha, the Kala Purusha, the Paramatma who is behind these Kala or the Samvatsaram, we cannot see it.

And this Kala Purusha is explained through this Arunam as having one head which is the Samvatsaram and he has the Ayanams as his face, Uttarayanam and Dakshinayanam and the Ritus are his characters or characteristics.

I mean when we say the Ritus are his characteristics, what does it mean is the Samvatsaram can be explained as having two Ayanams, right, so the Samvatsaram contains two Ayanams or it can be explained as having six Ritus.

Six Ritus makes one Samvatsaram or two Ayanams make one Samvatsaram or 12 Masams make one Samvatsaram.
So those different ways to explain the Samvatsaram, that's what it means here that the Ritus are its characters or are the characters of the Kala Purusha, that's what this means here.

And we are going to see more about the time, the units of time or the descriptions of the Kala Purusha in the next Panchadi.
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।