गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

Now let us see the seventh Panchadi and the meaning.

उभयत-स्सप्ते᳚न्द्रिया॒णि । ज॒ल्पित॑-न्त्वेव॒ दिह्य॑ते । 
शुक्लकृष्णे सं​वँ॑थ्सर॒स्य । दक्षिण वाम॑योः पा॒र्​श्वयोः । 
तस्यै॒षा भव॑ति ॥ 
शु॒क्र-न्ते॑ अ॒न्यद्य॑ज॒त-न्ते॑ अ॒न्यत् । 
विषु॑रूपे॒ अह॑नी॒ द्यौरि॑वासि । 
विश्वा॒ हि मा॒या अव॑सि स्वधावः । 
भ॒द्रा ते॑ पूषन्नि॒ह रा॒तिर॒स्त्विति॑ । 
नात्र॒ भुव॑नम् । न पू॒षा । न प॒शवः॑ । 
नादित्य-स्सं​वँथ्सर एव प्रत्यक्षेण प्रियत॑मं-विँ॒द्यात् । 
एतद्वै सं​वँथ्सरस्य प्रियत॑मग्ं रू॒पम् । यो-ऽस्य महानर्थ उत्पथ्स्यमा॑नो भ॒वति । 
इद-म्पुण्य-ङ्कु॑रुष्वे॒ति । तमाहर॑ण-न्द॒द्यात् ॥ 7 ॥

Now let us see the meaning of every line.
​

उभयत-स्सप्ते᳚न्द्रिया॒णि 
​
Ubhayataḥ Sapta Indriyani.

Ubhayataḥ, on both sides.

Here it means really, because we talked about the Kala Purusha having both Uttarayanam and Dakshinayanam as his face and we also said that he has Nana Mukhas, that is, right, so Dakshina, Uttarayan as the faces or as the mouth, mouth or faces, we saw that in the last mantra and Samvatsaram is his head, that’s what we saw.
​
Now on the sides, it is now talking about it, on the sides, the Samvatsaram, the Kala Purusha has Uttarayanam and Dakshinam as its faces and this face has seven dwarams.
​
On seven dwarams here basically it says the sides, but it is really talking about Uttarayanam and Dakshinayanam of the Kala Purusha and Sapta Indriyani, seven Indriyani are the one that’s on the faces because we are still talking about the face and Sapta comes because there are Sapta dwarams, that’s what the Bhashyakara says.

Not Indriyani, Sapta Indriyani, but the Indriyani that have seven dwarams.
​For example, we have two eyes, two noses, two ears and one mouth, so seven dwarams, those are the Indriyani talked about here.
So the Samvatsaram or the Kala Purusha has Uttarayanam and Dakshinayanam as its face and this face has seven dwarams.
That’s what this mantra says.

ज॒ल्पित॑-न्त्वेव॒ दिह्य॑ते 

Jalpitaṁ is spoken, some words, I mean of not much worth, Jalpitaṁ Tu, indeed Tu, Jalpitaṁ Tveva, only or precisely.
Dihyate is seen, Dihyate is seen.
So the literal meaning of this mantra is what is seen with our eyes is what we speak.
Jalpitaṁ, that’s what we speak.
We just talk about what we are able to see.
That’s the only thing we speak.
What we see, we are seeing is only thing we are speaking.
Indirectly that means we are not talking about the cause behind it.
We are not seeing behind what we see, that’s what it says.
​So we just talk about the Samvatsaram with the two Ayanam and Ritus and how the different species with the seven dwarams in the face are born from that Samvatsaram because we see them.
Pratyakshena we see them, so we only talk about them, but we don’t think or talk about the cause behind that Samvatsaram or the Kala Purusha who is the Paramatma.
​That’s what this means, these two lines, Ubhaya Dasa Saptendriyani Jalpitaṁ Tveva Dihyate.

शुक्लकृष्णे सं​वँ॑थ्सर॒स्य

Shukla Krishnae, Shuklaḥ, Krishnaḥ, the bright and dark fortnights, Shukla Paksham, Krishna Paksham.It could also mean day and night.
​Day and night, that’s also day, Shukla is day, Krishna is Ratri, which is the night.
You could also see both ways.
Here the Bhashyakara also says, it could also mean Uttarayanam, which is the Shukla Margam, Dakshinayan, which is the Krishna Margam.
That also could be taken here, but more appropriate will be the fortnights here because we already said Dakshinayanam and Uttarayanam as the faces of the Kala Purusha in the previous mantras.
Samvatsarasya, of the Samvatsaram, see, the bright and dark halves or fortnights of the year, that’s what literally this line means.

दक्षिण वाम॑योः पा॒र्​श्वयोः
​Dakshina, right side, Vama, the left side.
Vamayo, Dakshina Vamayo, on both the left and right sides or right and left sides.
Parshvayo, on the two sides, left and the sides, the two sides.

तस्यै॒षा भव॑ति
Tasya Bhavati, Tasya, of that, of that Samvatsaram Esha.
This or here it is the following mantras.
That’s what it means here, Esha means the following mantras, Bhavati is going to talk about, is describing more about this Samvatsaram, is described below in the following mantras, that’s what this Tasya Bhavati.

So about the Samvatsaram more is going to be explained, that’s what this means, Tasya Bhavati.
So the Samvatsaram has both its right and left sides, the day and nights are the both right and left sides or the Shukla Krishna Pakshams are its right and left sides and in the below mantras or the mantras that are going to follow hereafter, going to talk about the more about this Pakshams or the day and night.
That’s what this means.

शु॒क्र-न्ते॑ अ॒न्यद्य॑ज॒त-न्ते॑ अ॒न्यत्​
Shukraṁ, bright again, pure, bright.
​Te, yours.
​Anyat, Anyat means here different, means literally, but here it says that’s one thing.
Anyat, that’s one part of it or one thing.
Yajyataṁ, Yajyataṁ we already saw Yajyatra in our Shanti mantra.
We saw Yajyataṁ means worthy of worship, right, worthy of worship.
Yajyataṁ, Te again, yours.
Anyat, that’s another part.
Shukrate Anyat Yajate Anyat.
So the bright side or the day is one part of yours and Yajyataṁ here means the Ratri, the night.
Night is the other part of yours.

Now why Yajyataṁ is a qualification given for Ratri here or why Bhashyakara interprets as Ratri, I mean I think they don’t say in that, but what I feel is we do all our Tarpanam and everything, the Pitru worship is always done in the Krishna Paksha mostly, right, so that’s maybe why they are giving a qualification here for Ratri as Yajyataṁ.
​So the Kala Purusha, his one side is bright fortnight, the Shukla Paksham, the other side is the Krishna Paksham, the night and which is the Krishna Paksham again with the qualification that says the worthy of worship, which is worthy of worship.

विषु॑रूपे॒ अह॑नी॒ द्यौरि॑वासि
Visharupe, Visharupe means here many forms, differing forms, but the Bhashyakara interprets here as Visharupe means the same duration, equal, that’s what Samam, that’s what it says, means they interpret here Visharupe as Ahani.
​Ahani is both day and night together.
Ahani, Dyauhu, Dyauhu is the Antariksham, the space in between heaven and Svargaloka, Dyauhu, Antariksham, Iva means like, Asi, it is, you are.
Asi, you are.
So Visharupe Ahani Dyauhu Iva Asi.
So the two forms that we saw, the bright and dark fortnights, they are equal, they are equal and it says the Kala Purusha that you are in between them, in between like day and night or the Paksham or the Ayanam, you are in between them like how heaven is in between earth and Svargaloka.
​So what it means is he is not associated with any of them, even though they are in them, but he is different, he is not associated with any of them, just like how Antariksham is, it is in between but it is not associated with either the earth or with the Svargaloka, that’s what it means here.

विश्वा॒ हि मा॒या अव॑सि स्वधावः
Vishwāḥ, all, everything.
​Vishwa Hi, indeed, Maya, Maya is the power, the Vikṣepaṇa Shakti, the creating power, illusion, Maya.
Avasi, Avasi means protecting, protecting, Avasi, you protect, you are the one who is a protector.
Avasi Swadhavah.
Swadhavah means the one, it’s interpreted here as one who provides food, who is the provider of food or nourishment we should say.
So if you compare Swadha, you know, look at Agni, if you look at Agni, Agni has, it says Agni has Swaha and Swadha as his wives.
Swaha is the one who carries the oblations we give in Agni to Devatas and Swadha carries it to the Pitṛs, so in that way if you take it, he is the provider of the food, so Swadhavah.
So it says, it is addressing the Surya or the Kala Purusha later, the mantra comes in, Bhadrate Pushan Niharati Rastu, the Pushan should be taken here, it is addressing the Pushan.
Hey Pushan or Surya Devata, you are the provider of the foods indeed, you are the provider and the protector, Avasi, you are the protector of this world created by Maya.
You are the protector and provider of foods, that’s what this mantra says.

भ॒द्रा ते॑ पूषन्नि॒ह रा॒तिर॒स्त्विति॑​
Bhadra, auspicious, Bhadram, Te, yours.
Pushan, Surya Devata or the Kala Purusha.
Iha, here, Ratihi, Ratihi means gift, Rati means gift, a favour, the gift, Astu Iti, may it be, Astu, may it be, Iti, thus.
Iti means thus, literally, but here it is the Iti is in this mantra here, it is in this mantra it is said, so Iti.
So hey Pushan, let this gift of yours, what is the gift, we saw in the previous mantra, provider of the food or nourishment and who is also protector, he gives the protection also, that’s a gift to us.
Hey Pushan, let this gift of yours to this world, to this world, Iha, in this world here, be auspicious, be auspicious as said in this mantra, as said in this mantra, let it be auspicious to us, that’s what it says here.
This mantra has so many other parts, I mean, so I will explain the rest of the mantra and how to interpret these things in the next recording.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।