गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​​

In the seventh Panchadi, in the part one, we have seen up to भ॒द्रा ते॑ पूषन्नि॒ह रा॒तिर॒स्त्विति॑ 
Now let us see the rest of the mantras and the meanings of them.
​​
नात्र॒ भुव॑नम् 
Na Atra Bhuvanam.
Na means not, Atra, here, Bhuvanam, the world, this world, Bhuvanam.
Here there is no world.
Natra Bhuvanam.

न पू॒षा
Na, not, Pusha, Pushan, the Surya Devata, the Devata of nourishment, Na Pusha, there is no Devata, Pusha Devata.

न प॒शवः॑ 
Na, not, Pashavah means the creatures, the beings, creatures, Na Pashavah, no creatures.
​
नादित्य
Na Adityah.
Na, no, Adityah, the sun, Surya, no sun.

स्सं​वँथ्सर एव प्रत्यक्षेण प्रियत॑मं-विँ॒द्यात्​
Na Aditya, Samvatsara Eva Pratyakshena Priyatamam Vidyat.
Na Adityah, Samvatsara Eva.
Samvatsarah, the year, Eva, alone, Pratyakshena, directly visible or seen, Priyatamam, Priyatamam means very beloved, mostly beloved, Vidyat is known, is known or seen.
So Samvatsara Eva Pratyakshena Priyatamam Vidyat, the year alone is known directly as the most beloved thing, the year alone is seen as the most beloved thing.

एतद्वै सं​वँथ्सरस्य प्रियत॑मग्ं रू॒पम्
Etat Vai Samvatsarasya Priyatamam Roopam.
​Etat, this, this form, this form of bright and dark fortnight of the Samvatsaram.
Etat Vai, indeed, indeed, Samvatsarasya, of the year, Samvatsarasya, of the year, Priyatamam, beloved, most, most beloved, Roopam, form.
So this bright or the dark fortnights of the Samvatsaram indeed is the most beloved form, for the most beloved form, this is the most beloved form.

यो-ऽस्य महानर्थ उत्पथ्स्यमा॑नो भ॒वति । 
Yosya means Yaha, which, Asya, Asya means of it, of it, of the Samvatsaram or this, this Samvatsaram, but here the Bhashyakara says Asya here means it, the Jeeva, Jeevatma or the, or the, the Jeevatma who is ignorant basically, who does not see the real cause behind all these things, right, so that, that Jeeva is addressed here as Asya.
​Mahan, Mahanartha, Mahan, great, Artha, it is action, the Karyam, Artha is here the Karyam or the action, Mahanartha, the great beneficial Karyams or act, that's what it means here.
Mahanartha Utpatsyamana.
​Utpatsyamana means, Utpatsyamana literally means, means arising, originating.
​Utpatsyamana here it is those actions that needs to be completed, those actions, beneficial actions that needs to be performed, need to be completed, that's what Utpatsyamana means.
Bhavati is.
So for the Jeevatma or the ignorant ones, basically Jeevatmas who has to complete the great actions or Karyams, Yaha, for them or, or those actions that needs to be completed by the Jeevatma, 

इद-म्पुण्य-ङ्कु॑रुष्वे॒ति 
Idam, this, Punyam, the merit, meritorious, sacred Punyam, Kurushva, do, perform, do it, Kurushva, Iti, said so, Iti, thus do it.
​Perform this sacred act.
So do this actions, that's what this literally means, Idam Punyam Kurushveti.
Tamaharanam Tadyat.
Tam, that action, that, that action, Tam Aharanam.
Aharanam is the, the, the offerings or the actions that is to be completed, Aharanam.
Tadyat, Tadyat, one should, literally means Tadyat, give, one should give.
Tadyat here, it is advised, it is advised to do these actions, those actions that we talked in the previous mantra which is Yosya Mahanartha Utpatsyamano Bhavati, that Mahanartha is those actions.
Tam, Tam means those actions, Mahanartha Aharanam Tadyat, those that needs to be done, should be done.
That's what this really means, Tamaharanam Tadyat, do those action that should be done, that should be completed.

So in these mantras, if you look from Vishwa Hi Maya, from that onwards up to this Tamaharanam Tadyat, so literally it talks about those ignorant Jeevatmas who just sees the Kala Swarupa, the Pratyaksha Roopam, Kala Swarupa with the, with the dark, bright and dark fortnights because that is, that is what, and that is what is easily available for us to see and it is Priyatamam, it is Priyatamam as well.
And we don't see the cause behind the Kala Purusha, we don't see the Paramatma behind it.

So after praying to the Kala Purusha in the previous mantra, we saw it is the provider of the food, it is the protector of this world which is created by Maya, this Maya world, you know, we prayed, we said, you know, let it be blissful to us, we said that, right.
​
Now after that, it just changes the tone and it says for those Jeevatma who wants to know the truth behind the Kala Purusha, it is saying Natra Bhuvanam, it starts from that, Natra Bhuvanam, Na Pusha, Na Pashava, Na Adityah, it says realize that there is no real world, there is no Pushan, there is no Devata of nourishment and there is no creatures, there is no, Na Pashava and there is no real Aditya, these are all Maya, these are all Maya.
​
And to understand the Paramatma, you need to, you need to get this Chitta Shuddhi, right, we need to get the Chitta Shuddhi.
​And how do we get that, it is, that is by doing actions only.

So that's why it says you should do all those beneficial actions like, like the one that we are doing, this, this Arunam is about Aruna Ketuka Chayanam, we already saw that it's, it's a Yagyam, so Yagyams like these things one should do, Kurushva, it's almost ordering us, Kurushva, do these beneficial actions so that that gives great benefits, first of all in this world itself and also it will lead us to the truth, that's what this says in these mantras.
​
So if we, to summarize this, you know, the Bhashyakara says this Panchadi particularly it can be split into two, can be seen as two parts.

One is as a Samhita part, you know, Veda, we already saw Samhita part is the mantra Roopam, the Brahmanam is the explanation of the mantra Roopam, right, so we already saw that.

We also, Shravanam, Mananam, Shravanam is the Samhita part, Mananam is the internalizing those what we heard, right, so that's the Mananam part of it, so the Brahmanam part of it.

So in the Samhita part of this mantra, the first part it talks about the Samvatsaram as the Kala Purusha, has two Ayanams as his face and Ritus are his characters and, and from those two faces or the Ayanams, we, all the creatures with Saban Dwarams are born and the Samvatsaram has the bright and dark fortnights as its sides of equal length and the Kala Purusha himself sits in between the earth and the Swargaloka in the Antariksham, he sits there but he is not associated with any of them and we worship that Kala Purusha who is the protector and provider of nourishments to us, to this world which is the Maya world, and we appreciate the Samvatsara Roopam as that's only one we see, we appreciate it very much and as we see it, that's, that's the mantra portion of this Panchadi.

Now the other part is the Brahmanam part of it where it says, you know, those Jeevas, as Jeevas, we don't see the real cause behind the Kala Purusha, behind that Samvatsara, the Kala Purusha.
So for the true seekers, you know, they will understand that these are all Maya, they are not real.
There is no Bhuvanam, there is no Pushan, there are no creatures and there is no Aditya, they are all Maya Roopams only.
The Paramatma is the truth behind all these.
And to realize that Paramatma, we should be doing the actions as laid out in the Dharma Shastram, right, that will purify us, gives us the benefits while living in this world, but also will lead us to the truth, that's what essence of this Panchadi is.

Now with this seventh Panchadi, the second Anuvakam of Arunam is over.

So from the next Panchadi, eighth onwards, the third Anuvakam starts and it, it has the eighth, ninth and tenth and eleventh Anuvaka Panchadis are in the third Anuvakam and we will see those Anuvakams in the next recording.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।