गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​​

So far we have seen seven Anuvagams… sorry, seven Panchadis in two Anuvagams. Now from the eighth, eighth Panchadi onwards, the third Anuvagam starts. Let’s look at the eighth Panchadi now.

सा॒क॒ञ्जानाग्ं॑ स॒प्तथ॑माहु-रेक॒जम् । षडु॑द्य॒मा ऋष॑यो देव॒जा इति॑ । 
तेषा॑मि॒ष्टानि॒ विहि॑तानि धाम॒शः । स्था॒त्रे रे॑जन्ते॒ विकृ॑तानि रूप॒शः । 
कोनु॑ मर्या॒ अमि॑थितः । सखा॒ सखा॑यमब्रवीत् । 
जहा॑को अ॒स्मदी॑षते । यस्ति॒त्याज॑ सखि॒विद॒ग्ं॒ सखा॑यम् । 
न तस्य॑ वा॒च्यपि॑ भा॒गो अ॑स्ति । यदीग्ं॑ शृ॒णोत्य॒लकग्ं॑ शृणोति ॥ 8 ॥

Let’s see, let’s see the meaning of line by line here.

सा॒क॒ञ्जानाग्ं॑ स॒प्तथ॑माहु-रेक॒जम् 
Sakam Janagam, Sakam Janam. Sakam Janam, here the Bhāshyakaras say it means the rays, the rays or the light of Surya from the sun, you know, the sun rays are called as Sakam Janam.
Saptatam – there are two interpretation of this, this word Saptatam. One interpretation, it says it is the seventh one. So we know the Surya, the rays of the Surya has, there are actually six in them, right? There are, um, VIBGYOR, that we know that, right? There are, um, even though it appears as one single white light, but it has seven rays in them, seven wavelengths in them. So it says the Saptatam means one of that, the seventh one – that’s what one meaning is.
The other meaning, it says Saptatam means the light from Surya has seven rays in it, seven rays in it, Saptatam; it’s not single but it is seven together, Saptatam.
Āhuḥ – they say, they call. Who say, who call? It comes in the second mantra: Ṛṣayaḥ, the Ṛṣis. The Ṛṣis say, Āhuḥ means “say”.
Ekajam – they are all as appear as one, born as one. All these seven rays are born as one, that is one interpretation. The other is the seventh ray, the Saptatam that we are talking about here, the seventh ray is born before the other six rays, Ekajam. So basically “Sakam Janagam Saptatam Āhur Ekajam” means the first interpretation is: the seventh ray from the Surya is considered born before, considered born first before the other six rays; or the other interpretation is the light originating from Surya has seven rays in it but they appear as one, Ekajam, they are appearing as one.

षडु॑द्य॒मा ऋष॑यो देव॒जा इति॑
Śat, Śat is six. Six – the six here means the six rays of the Surya, the six rays.
Udyamaha, Śad Udyamaha. Udyama means rising, rising from Surya, or of these six rays rising from the Surya, from the six rays that are coming from the Surya devata. Or it could interpret in another way: the six rays are bound by the seventh ray. Udyamaha, Śad Udyamaha means the six rays are bound by the seventh ray that was born first as per the previous mantra. So that one seventh ray binds all these other six rays; that’s another interpretation by the Bhāshyakaras.
Ṛṣayaḥ – we already saw – the Ṛṣis. Devajāḥ. Devajāḥ means born from the Devas, God‑born; the rays are born from the Surya devata, Devajāḥ. Iti – thus. So the Ṛṣis thus say that these six rays of the Surya are bound by this one, the seventh ray which was born first, which was born first. That’s one interpretation; the other interpretation is the six rays are born from Surya devata, they are not talking about the seventh one here. Even though there are seven rays, we saw Saptatam, but here it is addressing the six rays only, and then we can say that the six rays are born out of the Surya devata.

तेषा॑मि॒ष्टानि॒ विहि॑तानि धाम॒शः
Teṣām – “of those six rays”, we are talking only about those six rays. Teṣām. Iṣṭāni – iṣṭāni means desired things, desired things, offerings. Iṣṭāni. Vihitāni – vihitāni, assigned, arranged. Vihitāni. Dāmasaḥ – abodes, place.
So it says “Teṣām iṣṭāni vihitāni Dāmasaḥ”. So for those six rays, Teṣām – for the six rays from the sun – the places or abodes for them are assigned or arranged by Surya devata. So what does that mean? It’s talking about the Ritus. There are six Ritus in our, as per our shastra, right? So we have Grīṣma Ritu, we have Varṣā Ritu, Śiśira Ritu, like that there are six Ritus are there. So all the six Ritus are the places or abodes for those six rays from Surya devata, that’s what it says here: Teṣām iṣṭāni vihitāni Dāmasaḥ.

स्था॒त्रे रे॑जन्ते॒ विकृ॑तानि रूप॒शः
Statre literally means “in the fixed place”, in the abiding principle. But here the Bhāshyakara says Statre here meaning “for the benefit of the world”, for the benefit of the world.
Rejante, Rejante – “they rejoice, they shine, Rejante”. Or the other interpretation by one of the Bhāshyakara is: they exist, they exist; they rejoice, they shine, Rejante.
Vikṛtāni – various, various forms. Vikṛtāni. Rūpaśaḥ – form, in various forms. So those six rays, for the benefit of the world, shines forth or exist in different, different forms, different, different forms – like the summer, the winter, spring – those are given. They are, they are termed using the word as Rūpa for these things – summer, winter – as a descriptive, as a Rūpa, or here literally the nature of those Ritus, nature of the… so Grīṣma Ritu means it is going to be hot; that’s the nature of the Ritu, that’s the Rūpam for that Ritu.

So the six rays corresponds to six Ritus, and each have their own abode or place and svabhāvam, the nature; Rūpam – they all have their own svabhāvam, nature. That’s what this means here.
So there’s a slight change here in how this, this Panchadi talks about trust in the shastras. So in the next few verses it’s giving an analogy; now it’s giving an analogy for those who does not believe in what these Arunam or the Vedas or the shastras say. So, right, so far we saw that there are six rays from the Surya that corresponds to the Ritus, and Ritus has a place – a place in the sense means like the months, right? Two months forms a Ritu, so the months are a place, and the svabhāvam – svabhāvam is they are either cold or they are hot like that, right? So it just explained that in this above four mantras.

Now somebody may doubt: how can it be true, how do you know this is true? That doubt may come. So for those who doubt, it is going to give an analogy in the next few mantras. Let’s see that.