कोनु॑ मर्या॒ अमि॑थितः । सखा॒ सखा॑यमब्रवीत् । 
जहा॑को अ॒स्मदी॑षते । यस्ति॒त्याज॑ सखि॒विद॒ग्ं॒ सखा॑यम् । 
न तस्य॑ वा॒च्यपि॑ भा॒गो अ॑स्ति । यदीग्ं॑ शृ॒णोत्य॒लकग्ं॑ शृणोति ॥ 8 ॥

It says, कोनु॑ मर्या॒ अमि॑थितः, 
kon mariya amititha, 
kon no, kaha no is kon, kaha, kaha means who? No, no means indeed, indeed. Mariya, mariya means mortals, means us, the human beings, mortals, the men or women, human beings, mortals, mariya ha, amititha ha. Amititha ha means who is not troubled by, who is not sorrowed by, affected by anybody else, amititha ha. 
So literally here it says, we'll see the meaning together because we have to take the three mantras or four together to understand the full meaning of it. 
But literally here, this line means who, indeed, among the mortals is not sorrowed or affected?

सखा॒ सखा॑यमब्रवीत्, 
Sakaya, Sakaya means a friend, Sakaya. To a friend, Abravitha spoke, told Abravitha, Sakaya mabravitha, a friend, to a friend, told. That's what literally it means. 

जहा॑को अ॒स्मदी॑षते, Jahaka ha. Jahaka ha means who abandons, deserts a friend, abandoning, deserting Jahaka ha. 
Asmati shate, asmati plus ishate asmati shate. Asmati means us, as from us, us. Ishate, hurting, becomes hostile, hurting, Ishate. 
So one who abandons us and turns away hurts, who hurts us and turns away from us, that's what it means.
Jahaku asmati shate turns away, abandoning us, becomes hostile to us. 

So let's look at these three things together. कोनु॑ मर्या॒ अमि॑थितः । सखा॒ सखा॑यमब्रवीत् । जहा॑को अ॒स्मदी॑षते 
what these three lines mean? It means, oh, men, it's addressing those men who, the Mariya, oh, men, will an unharming, unharming, Amititha ha, unharming friend, Sakah, will an unharming Sakah, a friend, say, abravitha, say, will he say anything bad about his friend, that's Sakah, Sakayam, then Sakah, his friend Sakayam, to his friend, like he will abandon me, Jahaka ha, he will hurt me, ishate, he will hurt us, asmati shate, he will hurt us, asmati shate. 
Will any friend, a true friend, who was not hurt by his friend, let us say a friend is there and that he is not hurt by his, another friend, by another friend of him, no harm was done to him, but in spite of that, will he go and tell anybody else that, hey, this other friend of mine is very hostile to me, he will hurt us like that, 
will anybody will, he'll spoke about a good friend to others, that's what this is asking, oh men, will any friend, will he misspeak or tell another friend about a good friend of him, that he is going to hurt us, he'll abandon us like that, will he, anybody will speak, he'll love his friends, it's asking that question.

So what is it, what is it trying to compare here, why it is giving this analogy, so think if somebody complains like that, you know, about their friends to other friends, if somebody says, speaks ill of their friends, will you trust them, we won't, right, we won't trust them, we will not have any trust on those men who speaks ill about their friends. 
Similarly, it is bringing about analogy, and then it is trying to say that the sastras only tells us what is the truth and what is good for us, just like a friend who never hurts us. The sastras are like a friend who never trying to hurt us. They only tell us the truth what is good for us. So it should never be questioned or distrusted. That's what it is trying to tell us. So have faith in the sastra - what it says it is telling us for our benefit only - so we should not have any distrust towards sastra. That's what it is trying to say to us.

यस्ति॒त्याज॑ सखि॒विद॒ग्ं॒ सखा॑यम् 
yaha - who, tityaaja - has abandoned or forsaken, sakividam - who is considered as a friend, sakaayam - friend, One who has abandoned a good friend - the other friend who was really good - not harming and trustworthy but inspite of that if you abandon him (tityaaja means abandoning him), 

न तस्य॑ वा॒च्यपि॑ भा॒गो अ॑स्ति -> na-not or no, tasya - of him means the friend who abandons, vacyapi - here it means sastras - learning them, learning the vedas or sastras, baagah means adhikaaram means qualification, asti - means exist (na asti - he doesn't get the qualification). So if a friend, the one who abandons a good friend for no reason has no qualification, no arhadaa-no adhikaaram to learn the vedas or sastras

यदीग्ं॑ शृ॒णोत्य॒लकग्ं॑ शृणोति
yadi - if, eem - that sabdaa is beeja mantra - it means the shrutis,the vedas - eem is considered as a saguna pranavam, om is considered as a nirguna pranava mantram, We seen the Sri Suktam right? "Taam padminimeem saranamaham prapadye....." - To saraswati-I surrender to her to the beeja mantra - padmineem  'eem' saramaham prapadye. It is beeja mantra representing here the sruthis or vedas. 
'Yadi' If that men who abandons a good friend, if he hears or learns those vedas 'eem', its waste - its in vain or useless (alakam).

So putting together this 8th Panchadi, it says, as per the rishis the 6 ruthus - the vasanta, greesma, varsha, sharad, hemanta, shisira rthu - so there are 6 ruthus - these 6 rthus are born out of the 6 rays of the Surya Bhagavan. There are 7 rays from sun, the 6 rays are the cause for the 6 ruthus and their nature is predetermined by Surya devata, by the God, for example greeshma means hot, varsha means it is going to rain, like that.. so thats what it means - the swabhaava. They shine forth for the benefit of us and if anyone doubts this, this saying of the vedas, then they are compared to men who does not trust a good friend and abandons him and those who abandons good friends are not fit to learn then the sastras, vedas, and even if they learn it, it is in vain and no benefit for them or for others. So it says, have faith, have trust in the sastra, vedas, because it is explaining to us that we cannot directly perceive by our indriyas. That's what is the essence of this 8th Panchadi. The next Panchadi we will see in the next recording. 
ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।





