गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​
​
Let us chant the 11th pañcati:
ज्यो॒तिषा᳚ ऽप्रति॒ख्येन॑ सः । वि॒श्व॒रू॒पाणि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि । 
आ॒दि॒त्याना᳚-न्नि॒बोध॑त । सं​वँथ्सरीण॑-ङ्कर्म॒फलम् । 
वर्​षाभि-र्द॑दता॒ग्ं॒ सह । अदुःखो॑ दुःख च॑क्षुरि॒व । 
तद्मा॑ पीत इव॒ दृश्य॑ते । शीतेना᳚ व्यथ॑यन्नि॒व । 
रु॒रुद॑क्ष इव॒ दृश्य॑ते ॥ 
ह्लादयते᳚ ज्वल॑तश्चै॒व । शा॒म्यत॑श्चास्य॒ चक्षु॑षी । 
यावै प्रजा भ्र॑ग्ग्​श्य॒न्ते । सं​वँथ्सरात्ता भ्र॑ग्ग्​श्य॒न्ते ॥ 
याः॒ प्रति॑तिष्ठ॒न्ति । सं​वँथ्सरे ताः प्रति॑तिष्ठ॒न्ति । 
व॒र्॒षाभ्य॑ इत्य॒र्थः ॥ 11 ॥
​
“Jyotishā apratikṣyeṇa saḥ.” Jyotishā – by the heat‑rays, or here interpreted as the tejas (radiance). Apratikṣyeṇa – unobstructed, irresistible, incomparable. Saḥ – he; here “saḥ” refers to the Rudra‑gaṇa mentioned in the last pañcati, where it was said that Grīṣma ṛtu comes with the eleven Rudras (Rudra‑gaṇas) clad in white garments. So this line conveys: Grīṣma ṛtu is burning hot due to the incomparable tejas of the Rudra‑gaṇa. This finishes the description of Grīṣma Ritu started in the previous (10th) pañcati.
​
Now the text shifts to the next ṛtu – Varṣā ṛtu (rainy season).

“ वि॒श्व॒रू॒पाणि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि । आ॒दि॒त्याना᳚-न्नि॒बोध॑त ।” 
Viśva‑rūpāni – of manifold forms, of all forms in the universe. Vāsāṃsi – garments, clothes, coverings. ĀdityānAm– “of the Ādityas”; i.e., of the Dvādaśa Ādityas (twelve solar deities). Nibodhata – understand, know.
​
“सं​वँथ्सरीण॑-ङ्कर्म॒फलम् । वर्​षाभि-र्द॑दता॒ग्ं॒ सह । ” 
Saṃvatsareṇam– for the whole year, yearly. Karma‑phalam – the fruit of actions, the result of karma. Varṣabhiḥ – by rains, in the form of rains. Dadhad – giving, bearing. Esaḥ (saḥ) – that (Varṣā ṛtu).
​
These mantras together say: Varṣā ṛtu provides benefits that last for the entire year (saṃvatsareṇam karma‑phalam), in the form of rains (varṣabhiḥ). These rains come through the twelve Ādityas (ādityānām). One should know (nibodhata) that these Ādityas are “clothed” in different colours ( वि॒श्व॒रू॒पाणि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि ), i.e., they appear with many‑coloured garments. The Ādityas are thus the cause of the rains of Varṣā ṛtu, which in turn support the fruits of actions for the whole year, and the Ādityas themselves are envisioned as wearing manifold‑coloured garments.
​
Next come four lines describing the experiential feel of Varṣā ṛtu:

“अदुःखो॑ दुःख च॑क्षुरि॒व” Adukkha – not painful, without sorrow. Duḥkha‑cakṣuḥ – “eyes of sorrow”; sorrowful eyes, eyes filled with sadness. Iva – as if, like.
​“तद्मा॑ पीत इव॒ दृश्य॑ते” Tadma – similar in sense to iva, “like that, as if.” Pītaḥ – yellow in colour. Iva – as if. Dṛśyate – is seen, appears.
​“शीतेना᳚ व्यथ॑यन्नि॒व” Śītena – by the cold, here meaning by the cool wind that blows in the rainy season. Avyathayan – not afflicting, not causing pain; pleasant. Iva – as if.
​“रु॒रुद॑क्ष इव॒ दृश्य॑ते” Rurudakṣa – literally one meaning is “with red eyes,” but here the traditional commentators take it as “nourishing the animals,” specifically the deer in the forest. So rurudakṣa is glossed as “nourisher of animals (deer).” Iva – as if. Dṛśyate – appears, is seen.
​
The teacher then groups these four together and explains their sense: after the Grīṣma ṛtu, which was burning hot, the rains of Varṣā ṛtu bring cool breeze and general pleasantness. The cool wind with rain is so soothing that it does not afflict at all – “शीतेना᳚ व्यथ॑यन्नि॒व” – it feels very good. Thus, Varṣā ṛtu is adukkha (not painful, pleasant).

Yet, in spite of this pleasantness, the season appears as if associated with sorrow in certain ways. “Duḥkha‑cakṣur iva” is taken to mean that people’s eyes look as if filled with sorrow, and “pīta iva dṛśyate” as if there is yellow coloration associated with fevers or jaundice‑like conditions; the season looks tinged with yellow, suggesting some suffering or deficiency. In other words, the onset of Varṣā ṛtu can coincide with fevers and eye ailments, so the season “looks” sorrowful even while it brings relief from heat.
​
At the same time, the animals—especially deer—in forests are well nourished in Varṣā ṛtu because there is abundant rain and hence plenty of grass and vegetation to graze. There is no shortage of food; the animals are healthy and well‑fed. So “rurudakṣa iva dṛśyate” is taken to mean that the season appears as if it is nourishing the animals.
​
In summary, these four lines say: although Varṣā ṛtu is in itself pleasant and nourishing, especially for animals, it also seems to bring, or to be accompanied by, conditions like yellow fever or eye diseases, so it presents a mixed picture—soothing and life‑giving, yet outwardly marked by signs of suffering.

The clip ends by previewing the next set of lines (“ह्लादयते᳚ ज्वल॑तश्चै॒व…” etc.), which will continue the description of Varṣā ṛtu’s effects, to be explained in the following recording.