गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

Now the fourth anuvakam starts with the twelfth Panchadi. Let us chant the twelfth Panchadi first.

अनुवाकः 4
अक्षि॑दुः॒खोत्थि॑तस्यै॒व । वि॒प्रस॑न्ने क॒नीनि॑के । 
आङ्क्ते चाद्ग॑ण-न्ना॒स्ति । 
ऋ॒भूणा᳚-न्तन्नि॒बोध॑त । क॒न॒का॒भानि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि । 
अ॒हता॑नि नि॒बोध॑त । अन्नमश्र्नीत॑ मृज्मी॒त । 
अ॒हं-वोँ॑ जीव॒नप्र॑दः । ए॒ता वा॒चः प्र॑युज्य॒न्ते । 
श॒रद्य॑त्रोप॒ दृश्य॑ते ॥ 12 ॥

Akshi, dukha uttitasya eva. Akshi, the eyes, dukha uttitasya, literally meaning born out of pain, eva, like that. The eyes born out of pain. So the Bhashyakaras gives the meaning for this one as like the animals or beings who has gotten rid of the pains in their eyes, relieved of pain in the eyes. That's what this line is interpreted.

वि॒प्रस॑न्ने क॒नीनि॑के, viprasanne, very clear, very clear. Kaninikhe, the pupil of the eye, the heart literally, it means the eyes. Whose vision is very clear, or the pupils can see clearly.

So these two lines is interpreted like this. Like how the eyes get clear vision after getting rid of any pains or diseases in them, the world becomes clear of disease or other sorrowful situations in this Sharatrudhu.

So if you remember in the Varsharudhu, we said that as if it brings the diseases like yellow fever or red eye, kind of those things. We saw that in the previous Panchadi. So Sharatrudhu, all those things are remote, it comes with, the world comes with disease-less or sorrowlessness in the Sharad ritu.

आङ्क्ते चाद्ग॑ण-न्ना॒स्ति. Angte cha means angte is the marks or smearing in the eyes, you know, like the ladies put the dark, what do you call, they decorate the eyes, right? That's what this angte means. Adganam, adganam is any blemish or impurity, like if tears come, it blocks your vision, right? If there are tears due to pain or anything in your eyes, it blocks your, obstructs your vision. That's what adganam is. Nasthi means it is not there. So the eyes are decorated angte because they are clear now. The eyes are clear, so they like to decorate it and there is no tears, there is no sorrow anymore. So the eyes are clear and people start decorating their eyes. आङ्क्ते चाद्ग॑ण-न्ना॒स्ति.

ऋ॒भूणा᳚-न्तन्नि॒बोध॑त
Ribhunam, of the Ribhus. Ribhus are divine craftsmen, the devatas who are divine craftsmen. Tathu all these nibodhata, understand. Understand that these are all the works of the Ribhus.

So, putting all these four lines together, 
अक्षि॑दुः॒खोत्थि॑तस्यै॒व । वि॒प्रस॑न्ने क॒नीनि॑के ।
आङ्क्ते चाद्ग॑ण-न्ना॒स्ति ।ऋ॒भूणा᳚-न्तन्नि॒बोध॑त

Know that the Sharad rutu comes with Ribhu devatas. The Ribhu devatas, the divine craftsmen, there are three of them who removes all blemishes from the previous ritu, the Varsha ritu, and makes all beings happy. It says here that people decorate their eyes as there are no more red eye or other diseases that were there in the previous ritu.

क॒न॒का॒भानि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि, kanakabhaani, golden colored or shining like gold, golden colored vaasaagumsi, garments or cloths.

अ॒हता॑नि नि॒बोध॑त, ahataani means they are untouched, new, they are unworn. Nibodhata, know that, understand. So the Ribhus are covered with new golden colored clothings, that's what these two lines mean.

अन्नमश्र्नीत॑ मृज्मी॒त 
Annamashnitha which means the food, asnitha means eat, you should eat good food. Mrudjmitha, pure, clean. So clean yourself and have good food. That's what literally this means.

अन्नमश्र्नीत॑ मृज्मी॒त । अ॒हं-वोँ॑ जीव॒नप्र॑दः Aham, I, vah, to you or for you, jivanapradaha, the giver of life, jivanapradaha, giver of life. I am the giver of life to you.

ए॒ता वा॒चः प्र॑युज्य॒न्ते, etavacha, like these, vachah, words or sentences, like what we see in the two lines above, prayujyante, are uttered, are spoken of.

श॒रद्य॑त्रोप॒ दृश्य॑ते, sharad, the autumn season, sharad ritu, yatra, where, upadrishyate, is seen.

So interpreting these lines together, when words like, eat clean food, or clean yourself, purify yourself, I will provide good food to you, or life to you, are heard, understand that the Sharad ritu has arrived. So putting together all these things, in this Panchadi, the Sharad ritu is described.It comes with Ribhu devatas who are covered in golden-colored clothings, and they remove all blemishes from the Varsha ritu or due to the Varsha ritu that was there, like any eye-related diseases, etc. Now, because of that, the people now, they decorate themselves, like putting anjana under eyes, that's ankhe anjana under eyes. And words like eat well, clean well, I will provide good life, etc., are heard in this Sharad ritu.

And the three Ribhus who are the devatas who comes in this Sharad ritu are Ribhu devata, who is the leader, who is associated with ingenuity, Vibhava, associated with brilliance, Vibhavan, and Vāja (Vacha), associated with strength or abundance. Vacha is abundance. That's what the three Ribhus who are the devatas in the Sharad ritu.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।