ॐ ॥ गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

So far, we have seen Vasanta Rutu, Grishma Rutu, Varsha Rutu, and Sharad Rutu. Now, the next Panchadi is explaining the Hemant Rutu. Let's chant the Panchadi first:

अभिधून्वन्तो-ऽभिघ्न॑न्त इ॒व । वा॒तव॑न्तो म॒रुद्ग॑णाः । 
अमुतो जेतुमिषुमु॑खमि॒व । सन्नद्धा-स्सह द॑दृशे॒ ह । 
अपद्ध्वस्तै-र्वस्तिव॑र्णैरि॒व । वि॒शि॒खासः॑ कप॒र्दिनः ।
अक्रुद्धस्य योथ्स्य॑मान॒स्य । कृ॒द्धस्ये॑व॒ लोहि॑नी । 
हेमतश्चक्षु॑षी वि॒द्यात् । अ॒क्ष्णयोः᳚, क्षिप॒णोरि॑व ॥ 13 ॥

अभिधून्वन्तो-ऽभिघ्न॑न्त इ॒व । वा॒तव॑न्तो म॒रुद्ग॑णाः ।
As if shaking violently all the living beings and afflicting pain or uncomfort. So the cold wind appears as if it makes the whole body shake and makes it feel very uncomfort. That's what these two mantras mean. Let's look at the other mantras. We'll take maybe three or four and then we'll see the meanings together.

अमुतो जेतुमिषुमु॑खमि॒व । सन्नद्धा-स्सह द॑दृशे॒ ह । 
अपद्ध्वस्तै-र्वस्तिव॑र्णैरि॒व । वि॒शि॒खासः॑ कप॒र्दिनः ।

अमुतो जेतुमिषुमु॑खमि॒व
Amutaha means the other loka. Amutaha usually says the heaven, but here we can take the Vaayu Loka because we are going to talk about the cold wind. So the bhaashyakara says this Amutaha refers here to the Vaayu Loka. From there, from the Vaayu Loka, the cold winds from the Vaayu Loka. Jetu, Jetu Vishamukka miva, Jetu means to conquer, to win. Ishu mukham is the tip of the arrow. Ishu mukham is the tip of the arrow. Let's see the other mantras and we will put them together for meaning. 

सन्नद्धा-स्सह द॑दृशे॒ ह 
Sannattaha means fully armed, as if you're ready to fight. You're covered completely, like you have a kavacha. Sannattaha. Dadrusheha. Sannattaha. Saha Dadrusheha. Saha means together. Here it is the groups, groups or togetherness. Dadrusheha. Dadrusheh appeared, seen, seen, appeared. Ha, this indeed, indeed.

अपद्ध्वस्तै-र्वस्तिव॑र्णैरि॒व
Apatvastih means shattered, scattered, or dirty. Here they also, the Bhashyakara interprets this word as a dirty. Vasthivarnaih iva. Vasthivarnaih is the color of the leather, broken colors, literally. It means the color of the leather. One of the Bhashyakaras interprets this as the color of the sheep skin, which is not so clean. It looks like, as if it looks like dirty and it's scattered. It's not very smooth. So that's what this vasthivarnaih iva.

वि॒शि॒खासः॑ कप॒र्दिनः
Vishikasaha, the one without any hair. Vishikasaha. Kabardinah, which one with braided hair or the matted locks of Shiva. Kabardinah. So matted locks.

So these four lines from अमुतो जेतुमिषुमु॑खमि॒व । सन्नद्धा-स्सह द॑दृशे॒ ह । अपद्ध्वस्तै-र्वस्तिव॑र्णैरि॒व । वि॒शि॒खासः॑ कप॒र्दिनः ।. What these lines together means is, the cold wind caused by the Marudhevatas from the Vayuloka is compared to a released arrow, which will cause pain when it hits the target. So the arrow, when it is shot, when it hits the target, it inflicts a fixed pain when it hits it. So the cold wind is compared to that. The cold wind causes so much uncomfort or pain to the people, to the people who with hair or without hair, with hair or without hair, they all cover, completely covered with their head, their body, their ears, everything, they cover with dirty-looking leather or sheet-colored clothes to cover themselves from the cold wind, right? Sheet-colored cloths. And they all stand next to each other in groups, as if they are, you know, touching each other with shoulder to shoulder. It's very close to each other, so that they feel the warmth. And that is compared to a Kavacham, Sannadaha. That is compared to the Kavacham, as if when some... to protect yourself against that arrow that is coming to shoot you. So the people, they cover themselves with the dirty-looking leather-colored or sheep-colored clothes and then stand next to each other, shoulder to shoulder, to warm themselves. And so this analogy of when the arrow is trying to, when the arrow is released, the tip of the arrow, when it hits the target, it afflicts pain. And to protect us from that, the cold wind is compared such that that it is similar to an arrow that hits the cold wind afflicts pain when it hits our body. And to protect from that, people cover themselves with the dirty-colored leather or sheep-colored skins, sheep skins, and they stand next to each other to warm themselves from the cold wind.

अक्रुद्धस्य योथ्स्य॑मान॒स्य । कृ॒द्धस्ये॑व॒ लोहि॑नी । 
हेमतश्चक्षु॑षी वि॒द्यात् । अ॒क्ष्णयोः᳚, क्षिप॒णोरि॑व ॥

अक्रुद्धस्य योथ्स्य॑मान॒स्य । कृ॒द्धस्ये॑व॒ लोहि॑नी ।
Agrtasya, one who is not angry, yotsyamanasya, who is ready to fight, 
krutasya, the one with the anger, krutasya, one with anger. Lohini is red, red colored.

हेमतश्चक्षु॑षी वि॒द्यात् । 
Here is where the Rutu is mentioned, hemantarutu, hematashchakchushi. One should know that the eyes of the hemantarutu, chaksushi vidyat

अ॒क्ष्णयोः᳚, क्षिप॒णोरि॑व 
it's like something like a projectile or rolling your eyes, kshipanoh, rolling the eyes. That's what this means

अक्रुद्धस्य योथ्स्य॑मान॒स्य । कृ॒द्धस्ये॑व॒ लोहि॑नी । हेमतश्चक्षु॑षी वि॒द्यात् । अ॒क्ष्णयोः᳚, क्षिप॒णोरि॑व ॥ 
o know that in the Hemantarutu, due to the cold, the eyes becomes red colored. Lohini, Lohini is red colored. Hematashchaktrishi lohini iva vidyat. So the eyes looks as if they are red, while if you are rolling your eyes with anger, when ready to fight someone, his eyes looks red, it's compared to that. The eyes look red in the hemantarutu as if somebody is ready to fight with anger and they are rolling the eyes with anger, even though actually they are not angry. Agrtasya, they are not angry, but it looks like kridyasya and yodhyamanasya. It looks like you are angry and also compared to somebody who is ready to fight, whose eyes are full of anger, which turns into red colour. Krutasya iva lohini, because of the anger, the eye appears red and like that in this hemantarutu, your eyes appears as red coloured because of the cold wind.

So the essence of this 13th Panchadi is the hemantarutu comes with cold winds brought by the Marut devatas, which causes lot of uncomfort or pain, as if an arrow pierces the body or hits the body. Living beings with hair or without hair cover themselves from this cold wind with the dirty or sheep-coloured clothings, leather clothings and stay close to each other to stay warm and as if protecting each other from the arrows, that is the cold waves. The eyes of all beings look very reddish, as if they are rolling their eyes with anger and ready to fight, even though they are not angry, but it appears as if they are angry, red colour with anger. That's what this Panchadi says about hemantarutu.

And the Marut devatas are, again, they are son of Diti, Kashyapa and Diti. So the story, you know, the Diti wanted a son powerful enough to defeat Indra. But when she was pregnant, Indra came to know that she is pregnant and that's the wish of hers to defeat, she wants a son who will defeat him. So he enters the womb and then cuts that womb into pieces and so that the baby or the inside her womb starts crying, "मा रुदः, मा रुदः". And he says, Marutaha, don't cry. That's where it comes Marut from there. That's where they come, Marut. And eventually they become companions for Indra. He blesses them that you'll be all right and then you'll become my friends and they come out. So these Devarasas become the wind Devarasas. Indra is the lord of wind, so they become the companions for Indra and they are wind deities, Marुत देवताः. That's how Marut Devatas. And there are so many of them, and typically somewhere I saw they say about there are 49 of them, but there is no such real numbers or how many Devatas are there. There are many of them, the Marut Devatas are.


ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।