गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

So let us look at the 14th Panchadi next.
दुर्भिक्ष-न्देव॑लोके॒षु । म॒नूना॑मुद॒क-ङ्गृ॑हे । 
ए॒ता वा॒चः प्र॑वद॒न्तीः । वै॒द्युतो॑ यान्ति॒ शैशि॑रीः । 
ता अ॒ग्निः पव॑माना॒ अन्वै᳚क्षत । इ॒ह जी॑वि॒काम-प॑रिपश्यन्न् । 
तस्यै॒षा भव॑ति । इ॒हेह वः॑ स्वत॒पसः । 
मरु॑त॒-स्सूर्य॑त्वचः । शर्म॑ स॒प्रथा॒ आवृ॑णे ॥ 14 ॥

So in this Panchadi, the Shishira Rutu is talked about.
We will look at line-by=ine meanings first, then we will see the meaning of each one of them.

दुर्भिक्ष-न्देव॑लोके॒षु
Durbhiksham means famine/scarcity of food or water.
दुर्भिक्ष-न्देव॑लोके॒षु
This is the worlds of gods. Devalokam The world of gods are here, it's simply the Akasa.
That's what it means, the sky. That's what this means here.

म॒नूना॑मुद॒क-ङ्गृ॑हे
manunam -> Among the humans.
Udagam is water. gruhe in the house, in the house, 

ए॒ता वा॒चः प्र॑वद॒न्तीः 
etha -> these; vacha->words, utterances, speaking about प्र॑वद॒न्तीः -> they are spoken, pravadantihi, spoken, speaking, spoken about 

वै॒द्युतो॑ यान्ति॒ शैशि॑रीः
Vaidyudah means, here, it's, literally it means lightning like, lightnings, vidyudha, or something that's formed of vidyudha, but here, this is, this means, the Bhashyakara says, Vaidyudha here, represents the craving for water, craving for water, craving for water, 
yanti, yanti means going around, moving around, yanti, 
saishirihi, the shishirarutu, shishirarutu, saishirihi, cold, wintry, shishirarutu.

So, take these four lines together, let's see the meaning.
दुर्भिक्ष-न्देव॑लोके॒षु । म॒नूना॑मुद॒क-ङ्गृ॑हे । ए॒ता वा॒चः प्र॑वद॒न्तीः । वै॒द्युतो॑ यान्ति॒ शैशि॑रीः । 
So, in the shishirarutu, those people who move around, those people who move around, looking for water, because what is scarcity, what scarcity is there in shishirarutu?
So, looking for water, say, these following words, in quotation, "there are no waters in the skies", in the deva lokeshu, in the skies, there are no waters, no rainy clouds, no rains, basically, no rains in the shishirarutu.
And, we need to go to houses, grihe, to house, in the house, we only see waters in the houses, so we have to go to house, to quench ourselves, to quench our thirst.
We have to go to and ask for waters in the houses, that's what this means.
So, they speak these kind of words, those people who are looking for water, who are moving around, looking for water, say these words, that there are no water or rainy clouds in the sky.
And, we don't see waters everywhere, but we have to go and get water from the houses where it is found. So, this says that the shishirarutu is very cold, wintery, and there are not plenty of water sources available. They are all dry. So, that's how the shishirarutu is starting.

Let's look at the other mantras.

ता अ॒ग्निः पव॑माना॒ अन्वै᳚क्षत । 
Those, those voices are the people who are talking about Thaaha.
Agni He, Agni, the fire deity, Agni Devada.

पव॑माना॒ अन्वै᳚क्षत 
Pavamaanah means purifying, but here he is talking about people who are looking for the water - that's what the bhasyakara interprets about the pavamaanah - those who are looking for water - suffering without the water - those people are referred to as the pavamanaah
Anavaiikshta - means observing - he observed them; he looks at them and then he is requesting the marut devatas (anvaiikshata). After he observes these people he is going to request the Marut devatas which are in the next lines. That's what anvaiikshata means - observing / looking at the suffering

इ॒ह जी॑वि॒काम-प॑रिपश्यन्न्
iha -> here in this earth; jeevikaam -> sustainence - life sustaining forces or the essential things needed for life which is water; aparipasyan -> not seeing / not finding enough water

तस्यै॒षा भव॑ति 
tasya -> of that; of that request he going to make after observing the scarcity of water; esa -> these words - these words that we are going to see; bhavati -> talked about; 
these words are spoken about; these words are uttered by the agni devata; 

So in these 3 lines: 
ता अ॒ग्निः पव॑माना॒ अन्वै᳚क्षत । इ॒ह जी॑वि॒काम-प॑रिपश्यन्न् । तस्यै॒षा भव॑ति ।
Means - what these 3 lines means is: the agni devata makes a request - he makes a request to the marut devatas - he sees - after seeing the scarcity of water - the suffering of the people - looking at that, he is making a request, a prayer to marut devatas. What that prayer is? That we are going to see in the next few lines:

इ॒हेह वः॑ स्वत॒पसः ।
iheha -> iha iha - here and there; vah -> from you; svatapasaha -> self radiant
 
मरु॑त॒-स्सूर्य॑त्वचः । 
marutaha -> oh marut devas; suryatvachaha -> self effulgent like surya

शर्म॑ स॒प्रथा॒ आवृ॑णे ॥
Sarma means protection. Literally, Sarma means protection.
Here, it is the Marute Vadas - We are asking for them to give the rain, the water.
That's what the Sarma here means. Literally, it means protection. Comforting.
Sapratha - Sapratha means Abundant. Sapratha. Abundance.
Avrne - I seek. I pray. Avrne.

So, the Agni Devata prays to the Marute Devatas to give plenty of rain. Everywhere in this earth. That's what these three lines mean.

So, putting together in this 14th Panchadi, Shisharudhu is described.
So, Shisharudhu starts with dryness and scarcity of water. Due to lack of rainy clouds in the sky. Water is found only in the houses. Not anywhere else.
So, those who move around talk about these conditions in the earth. Those people who move around talk about this condition.
So, the Agni Devata seeing this plight of those people who move around looking for water. Which is very essential for the living beings.
And he understands that. So, he makes a prayer to the Marute Devatas who are self-evulgent like the Surya Devata and who can remove these sufferings. 
By providing plenty of rain everywhere. So, they are making a request to the Marute Devatas. To provide rain. To remove the sufferings of these people.

With this, the 14th Panchadi is over. And also, the 4th Anuvakam also ends here. We are going to talk more about the Shisharudhu in the next 2 more Panchadis.
We will see the details in there.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।
