गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

We have seen four anuvakams so far. Now the fifth anuvakam starts with the 15th panchadi.

Let us chant the panchadi first. 
अति॑ ता॒म्राणि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि । अ॒ष्टिव॑ज्रि श॒तघ्नि॑ च । 
विश्वे देवा विप्र॑हर॒न्ति । अ॒ग्निजि॑ह्व अ॒सश्च॑त । 
नैव देवो॑ न म॒र्त्यः । न राजा व॑रुणो॒ विभुः । 
नाग्नि-र्नेन्द्रो न प॑वमा॒नः । मा॒तृक्क॑च्च न॒ विद्य॑ते । 
दि॒व्यस्यैका॒ धनु॑रार्त्निः । पृ॒थि॒व्यामप॑रा श्रि॒ता ॥ 15 ॥

Now let us look at the meaning of this panchadi. Here, the Sishra rudhu is continued.

Describing the Sishra rudhu is continued here. And it is telling about the devatas for this Sishra rudhu, who are Vishwadeva. Vishwadeva are the devatas for Sishra rudhu and it is describing about them in this panchadi.

Let us look at the mantras first. 

अति॑ ता॒म्राणि॑ वासा॒ग्ं॒सि 
अति॑ ता॒म्राणि॑ : Tamrani means coppery red or reddish color, red colored. Atitamrani means very reddish, very reddish color. Vasagumsi, which is Vasamsi, means garments.
Red colored, very red colored garments. That is what this means. Atitamrani Vasagumsi.

अ॒ष्टिव॑ज्रि श॒तघ्नि॑ च: Ashti, it is a weapon made of bones.
Like Vajrayudam kind of thing. Vajri is the next one. Ashti is a weapon made of bones.
Vajri is a club or thunderbolt like weapon that Indra has. Vajram. Vajri is another weapon.
Sadagni. Sadagni is a weapon that can slay hundred peoples at a time. Sadagni.
So these are all weapons used by Vishwadevas. Ashti, Vajri, Sadagni. All these are weapons used by the Vishwadevas.

विश्वे देवा विप्र॑हर॒न्ति : Vishwadeva. The Vishwadevas.
Vipraharanti. They drive away, strike, win over. They drive apart the enemies with the weapons that we saw in the previous mantra.
Ashti, Vajri, Sadagni. With these weapons, the Vishwadeva Vipraharanti. They drive away the enemies.

अ॒ग्निजि॑ह्व अ॒सश्च॑त: Agnijihva means fire tongued. Their tongues is fire. Agnideva is in their tongue. Agnijihvaha Asaschatha. Asaschatha here, the Bhashyakara says, The Vishwadeva are making victorious words. Asaschatha. They are talking victorious words. Because they win over their enemies with those weapons. And after winning over, they are making the Jayagosham. We say, right? So that's what Asaschatha means. So these first four lines, it just describes the Sishura Ritu.
Where the Vishwadevas are the Devatas for the Sishura Ritu. And they are wearing reddish or very red colored garments. And they drive away the bad forces or enemies with many weapons.
Like Ashti, Vajri, Sadagni. And Agni is their tongue. It's in their tongue. And they make victorious noise after winning over those bad forces or enemies. 

Here, another interpretation by the Bhashyakara. When he says Agni is their tongue. What it means is that the Ahuthis offered in Agni are accepted by these Vishwadevas. That's what they are saying. Agnijihvaha means the Ahuthis offered in Agni are accepted by Vishwadevas.

Let's look at the other mantras next. 

नैव देवो॑ न म॒र्त्यः
naiva na eva naiva, neither, neither. devaha na martyaha devaha means God.
There is no God. na martyaha, there is no mortal. martyaha means mortal, means manishyas, who are not eternal.
We are martyaha, mortals. We are not immortals, we are mortals. So, it is munishya.
na deva na munishya There is no deva, there is no munishya. That's what it means. naiva devo na martyaha 

 न राजा व॑रुणो॒ विभुः
There is no raja, na raja, there is no king.
varunaha, varuna Bhagavan vibhuhu, vibhuhu is mighty. Prabhu is vibhuhu, Prabhu or mighty. There is no king or a mighty Varuna.

नाग्नि-र्नेन्द्रो न प॑वमा॒नः 
na agnijih na indro, na indraha na pavamanaha That is, not agni, na agni, not agni. na indraha, na indra, not indra na pavamanaha, not pava pava is wind, wind god, devadah of wind. 

मा॒तृक्क॑च्च न॒ विद्य॑ते
matrik means equal to us, matrik, equal to us. kashchana, any devadah, kashchana, any devadah vidyate is found or exists. No devadah whatsoever exists who is equivalent to us. So in these four lines, नैव देवो॑ न म॒र्त्यः । न राजा व॑रुणो॒ विभुः । 
नाग्नि-र्नेन्द्रो न प॑वमा॒नः । मा॒तृक्क॑च्च न॒ विद्य॑ते । 
What the Visvedevas are saying, you know, we saw in the previous mantra, asaschata, they were victorious words, they were speaking victorious words.

These are the words they are speaking. What are they saying? There exists no devadah or a manusya or king like mighty Varuna or agni or vayu or Indra who is equivalent to us in power, who is equivalent to us in power. Such words they are making after winning over the enemies.

Let's continue, see the other two mantras in this panchadi. 

दि॒व्यस्यैका॒ धनु॑रार्त्निः । पृ॒थि॒व्यामप॑रा श्रि॒ता ॥ 
divyasya divyasya of the heavenly, of the Visvedevadas divyasya of the Visvedevada eka one, eka divyas, divya divyas, divyaha asya eka the eka is one dhanurarthnihi the corner dhanurarthni is the corner, one end of the bow one end of the bow, dhanu is the bow dhanurarthni is the end, one end of the eka dhanurarthni means one end of the bow one end of the bow here it says div, div, asya it's in the asya is the Visvedevadas, div is heavenly the one end of the bow is in the heaven that's what it means one end of the bow of the Visvedevadas is in the heaven पृ॒थि॒व्यामप॑रा श्रि॒ता the other end, prathuvyama is on the earth in the prathuvi, prathuvyama aparashrita, apara is the other end of the dhanu the Visvedevadas bow, the other end shrita is placed, resting so one end of their bow used by the Visvedevas in the heaven, the other end is in the earth that tells you how huge it is how mighty they are that's what these two mantras describe 

So in summary, this shisira ritu, the Visvedevas are the Devadas and they are seen wearing very red colored garments and they have several weapons like ashti, vajri, sadagni and with that they drive away all the enemies and they also speak of themselves saying that there is no God equivalent to us including any Devas any other Devadas, Manushyas Agni, Indra or mighty king Varuna or Vayu any of them, none of them are equal to us they speak such words and their tongues are Agni Agni is their tongue and the bow that these Visvedevas carry is so huge, one end is in the heaven and the other end is in the earth and it's so huge, it means they are so mighty that's what this panchadi means more about seshita ritu is described in the next one or two panchadis and we will see that in the next recording 

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।