गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​

We have seen up to 15 Panchadhis in Arunam. So now we are going to continue with the 16 Panchadi where the bow of Vishvedevas, the glory of the bow is explained further. Let us chant the sixteenth Panchadi.

तस्येन्द्रो वम्रि॑रूपे॒ण । ध॒नुर्ज्या॑-मछि॒नथ्स्व॑यम् । 
तदि॑न्द्र॒धनु॑रित्य॒ज्यम् । अ॒भ्रव॑र्णेषु॒ चक्ष॑ते । 
एतदेव शं​योँ-र्बार्​ह॑स्पत्य॒स्य । ए॒त-द्रु॑द्रस्य॒ धनुः । 
रु॒द्रस्य॑ त्वेव॒ धनु॑रार्त्निः । शिर॒ उत्पि॑पेष । 
स प्र॑व॒र्ग्यो॑-ऽभवत् । तस्मा॒-द्य-स्सप्र॑व॒र्ग्येण॑ य॒ज्ञेन॒ यज॑ते । 
रु॒द्रस्य॒ स शिरः॒ प्रति॑दधाति । नैनग्ं॑ रु॒द्र आरु॑को भवति । य ए॒वं-वेँद॑ ॥ 16 ॥

Now let us see the meaning of each lines.

तस्येन्द्रो वम्रि॑रूपे॒ण
Tasya of him. Of the Visvedevas. Tasya-> their, Of Visvedeva.
Tasya, Indraha -> Indra.Lord Indra.
वम्रि॑रूपे॒ण -> Vamri Roopena.In the form of termites.
Vamri is termite. Tasya Indra Vamri Roopena.
So Indra took the form of termite.

ध॒नुर्ज्या॑-मछि॒नथ्स्व॑यम्
Danuhu -> The bow.
Jyam. Jyam is the string of the bow.
Jyam. Achenath -> He cut off. Achenath -> He cut off. Swayam by himself. Swayam here is the Indra.

So.Tasya Indra.Vamri Roopena.Danuhu.Jyam.Jyam.Swayam.
So Indra. Who took the form of termite. And he himself. Swayam. He himself. Cut the string. Of the bow.Of the Visvedevas.
That's what this meaning of these two lines are.
That, the bow, that, bow, indradhanu, it's called as indradhanush, indradhanu.
The one that was cut by indra has no string now.
That, thanush, that bow is now called as indradhanush. That indradhanu, it, yajyam, it is, that's, ayajyam, without string.
Jyam, jyam, means the string.
Ayajyam, means without the string.
The bow, without the string, is called indradhanush.

अ॒भ्रव॑र्णेषु॒ चक्ष॑ते
Abravarnesu, means many colors in the clouds.
Many colors in the cloud. It's seen. We see it as many colors.
That indradhanush is nothing but the rainbow that we see in the cloud.
It's called as indradhanush.
Sometimes it's also called as rudradhanush.
So, the indradhanush is the one without any string, which was cut by indra.
So, that, the rainbow is called as indradhanush.
For that reason, it's called as indradhanush.
This indeed, that's referring to the bow of Visvedeva.
This indeed, etatheva.

एतदेव शं​योँ-र्बार्​ह॑स्पत्य॒स्य 
Sanyoho, is the name of the son of Brihaspati. Brihaspati is the deva guru.
Brihaspati. One of his sons is called as Sayu.
So, Sanyoho, Bharaspatyasya.
This bow, that the Visvedeva's bow, was also used by Sayu, who is the son of Brihaspati.
The same bow was used by him.

ए॒त-द्रु॑द्रस्य॒ धनुः
Not only that, rudra, rudrasyadanuhu.
Rudra's bow is also like Visvedeva's.
Or, Visvedeva's danuhu is also used by rudra.
Etatrudrasyadanuhu.
Etat, that is this bow of Visvedeva, rudrasyaya of rudra danuhu bow.
So, this is also said as rudradhanush or used by rudra.

So, in these lines, if you look at it.
तदि॑न्द्र॒धनु॑रित्य॒ज्यम् । अ॒भ्रव॑र्णेषु॒ चक्ष॑ते । 
एतदेव शं​योँ-र्बार्​ह॑स्पत्य॒स्य । ए॒त-द्रु॑द्रस्य॒ धनुः । 

What it means is, so it's also the glory of the Visvedeva's bow.
So, Indra, when you see that the bow is so huge, its one end is in Svargaloka and the other end is in earth.
He took the form of a termite and then cut the bow, the string of the bow.
And, that, and so that now is called, without the string, the bow is now called as Indradhanush.
Which is seen as many colored, the rainbow that we see in the sky.
It's also so huge, right?
I mean, and we see just the shape of it as a danush, but there is no string.
So, that's why we call Indra danush.
The danush that was cut by Indra, who cut the string of the Visvedeva's danu.
And, this bow was used by Sayu, who is one of the sons of Vrughaspati.
And, also, Rudra uses his bow.
Usured the bow of Visvedeva's.
That's what it says.

रु॒द्रस्य॑ त्वेव॒ धनु॑रार्त्निः । शिर॒ उत्पि॑पेष । 
We have to take these two lines together.

रु॒द्रस्य॑ त्वेव॒ धनु॑रार्त्निः । शिर॒ उत्पि॑पेष । 
Rudraśya -> Of Rudra.
Ewa tveva, Ewa indeed.
Danuh->The bow.
Arthnihi, Arthnihi means, one of the end of the bow. The end of the bow.
Arthnihi.
Sira utpipesa.
Sira ha -> The head.
Utpipesa. Smashed. Cut off.
So, Rudraśya tveva dhanurārtnihi.
Sira utpipesa.
It says, literally says, the end of the bow.
The end of the bow.
Cut the head of Rudra.
That's what these two lines mean.
Rudraśya.
Sira ha.
Utpipesa.
By the dhanurārtnihi.

By the end, one of the end of the bow.
So, in, it is said that in the Puranas, it is said, one time, Shiva was using the head of the bow.

The visvedeva was bow.
And then he fought with the asuras.
And after winning the war, he was resting his head with the chin on the, one of the end of the bow.
Right?
So, he was resting on it.

Now, Indra, when he cut the string, because the bow is held in tension with the string, right?
So, when he cut it off, it just sprang back, right?
And that cut the head of Rudra.
So, that's what the Puranas, it's, it's, when Indra cut the string, Rudra's, who was resting his head, as chin, with the chin, on the, one end of the bow, when it sprang back, it cut off his head.

So, that head, that head, that head of Rudra, स प्र॑व॒र्ग्यो॑-ऽभवत् । तस्मा॒-द्य-स्सप्र॑व॒र्ग्येण॑ य॒ज्ञेन॒ यज॑ते । 
Prabargya, Abhavatu, it became Prabargya, the rite.
Prabargya is one of the rite, a ceremony, done in Jyotishtoma Yajna.
In the Jyotishtoma Yajna, they perform this rite called Prabargya, which is a preparatory rite in this Yajna.
So, basically, it is a preparatory, in the rite, the Jyotishtoma Yajna, they use the Prabargya to form the head of, of the sacrifice.
So, that's where this Prabargya, right, is used.
And this Rudra's head, become the Prabargya.

तस्मा॒-द्य-स्सप्र॑व॒र्ग्येण॑ य॒ज्ञेन॒ यज॑ते । 
Tasmadhyap saprabargyena yajna,
Therefore, whoever, saprabargyena, with the Prabargya right, yajna yajna, in the sacrifice, yajna, performs or worships.
That is, anyone who worships in the yajna, the jodhishthoma yajna, with the prabargya, that's what these lines means.
In the ajna of jodhishthoma, who uses this prabargya, he, that one who worships, rudrasya of rudra,
saha, the one who does this ajna, saha, siraha, the head, pradidadati, he is giving it back, attaches again to the body of rudra, pradidadati, who gives the head back to the rudra.
That is, who does this prabargya in the jodhishthoma yajna, is considered the one who reattaches the head of Shiva.
नैनग्ं॑ रु॒द्र आरु॑को भवति ।
nainagum rudra aruko babati, nainagum rudra aruko babati, nainagum, naina, here is enam, na, enam, enam means him, him, the one who performed the ajna, enam, na, not, rudraha, rudra, arukaha,
Arukaha means who inflicts pain, who punishes. Arukaha. Who harms. Arukaha. Na bhavati. The na should be taken here. Na bhavati.
So, the one who performs that yajna, he is considered as the one who reattaches the head of rudra to the body and he is not harmed by rudra. Rudra does not harm him. That one who does that yajna. That's what it means.
 नैनग्ं॑ रु॒द्र आरु॑को भवति ।  . Enam rudra arukho na bhavati. That's what it is. So, he does not, rudra does not harm him.

य ए॒वं-वेँद॑ ॥. So, know thus. Whoever knows this or know that. Whoever does this yajna with the pravargya, he will not be harmed by rudra. That's what this means. 

So, with this, the sixth anuvaka comes to, fifth anuvaka comes to an end and the next sixth anuvaka will start.
Let's look at a summary of this panchadi, sixteenth panchadi:
See, the glory of Visvedeva's bow is that rudra uses it in one of the wars with Asura. Asura's. And after the war, when he was resting his chin on one end of the bow, Indra, with the form of termite, taking the form of termite, cut the string, which caused rudra's head to be separated or cut off. Now, also, the Visvedeva's bow is used by son of Brighaspati, who is Sayu, who is son of Brihaspati.

I didn't find any much reference to that anywhere. So, I think, I think, must be somewhere in some Puranas, it should be there, but I did not find any reference of who is Sayu, who is the son of Brihaspati. We will see in some other time. If I can find, I will add more details on that.
So, with the head cut off, the head became a prabhargya rite in the Jyotish Thoma Yajna.
Now, whoever does the prabhargyam in the Jyotish Thoma Yajna, he will not be harmed by rudra.
So, he will not be harmed by rudra. That's what the essence of this 16th panchadi is.
We will see more about the Shishra Ruti is still explained in one or two more panchadis.
We will see it in the next recording.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।