गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​, 
हरिः ओम् श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः । हरिः ओम् ॥ 

so let us look at the 18th panchadi of the 6th anuvakam, 

निजानुकामे᳚ न्यञ्ज॒लिका । अमी वाच-मुपास॑तामि॒ति । 
तस्मै सर्व ऋतवो॑ नम॒न्ते । मर्यादा करत्वा-त्प्र॑पुरो॒धाम् । 
ब्राह्मण॑ आप्नो॒ति । य ए॑वं-वेँ॒द । 
स खलु सं​वँथ्सर एतै-स्सेनानी॑भि-स्स॒ह । 
इन्द्राय सर्वान्-कामान॑भिव॒हति । 
स द्र॒फ्सः । तस्यै॒षा भव॑ति ॥ 18 ॥

So in this 18th panchadi the shishirarthu is kind of concluded, and it also puts together all the other ritus that we have seen so far and describes how Surya is the Kalasvaroopi.

Let us look at each line by line:
निजानुकामे᳚ न्यञ्ज॒लिका 
Januka is the knees, the knees; may means mine.. nengelica is ni Angelica, njalika angelika is again with reverence, we with reverence we fold our hands anjali in Anjali mudra, angelic anjalika ni Anjalika means it's again stressing with this folded hands, the other ni Nijanuka, there it is saying that the knees are touching the ground, knee touching the ground. 
So, in essence, my hands are folded together, as in a salutation, and my knees are touching the ground, we saw that in the last Panchadi as well, because of the cold, we fold our hands together, we kind of kneel down to keep us warm, so that's what this is, निजानुकामे᳚ न्यञ्ज॒लिका ।

अमी वाच-मुपास॑तामि॒ति । 
Ami-> These these words, ami vacham, these words like the one that we just saw, that you have to hold your fold your hands, you need to kneel down, those kind of words, upaasataam, may people listen, follow it thus. What was said thus, may people follow the words we spoke so far about the Shishira ruthu. Let that be followed. It's saying that, so between one and two, if we take line one and two, it says that again. It emphasizes for those who do not know how to be in a shishirah. Let them follow what is said so far, that is, fold your hands, kneel down, keep yourself warm in the shishira ruthu. That is what these two lines mean. 

तस्मै सर्व ऋतवो॑ नम॒न्ते 
Now we have to take the next four lines together, or four five lines together, to understand the meaning of these coming verses, like 
तस्मै सर्व ऋतवो॑ नम॒न्ते । मर्यादा करत्वा-त्प्र॑पुरो॒धाम् । ब्राह्मण॑ आप्नो॒ति । य ए॑वं-वेँ॒द । 
Let's take them together. Let's see the meaning, but we'll put the sense of it together.
तस्मै सर्व ऋतवो॑ नम॒न्ते, tasmai to him, to him, sarvai-> all rathavah seasons, namante-> they bow down 

मर्यादा करत्वा-त्प्र॑पुरो॒धाम्
prapurodham, pra purodham, indeed, indeed are the foremost position he attains purodham like purodha he attains the foremost position becomes the preeminent position puro dham, who maryadha who knows the boundary the Limits of all the rutus we explained so far are the characteristics of them, maryatha karatvat-> knowing that he follows them, whatever is said in each ruthu, how it should be followed, what should be followed in each ritu. Now we saw that in the vasanna ruthu people have to sow the seed in the right time, right, and so all those characters that we explained that one should understand and follow, that's Marlyadha Karatvaat. If he does that, he reaches the foremost position, Brahmana apnoti 
apnoti reaches brahmana, brahmana tatvam. Here, brahmana is not the sect of people that we are talking here, it's the brahmana, the person who thus knows all the characteristics mentioned so far, so far, 
तस्मै सर्व ऋतवो॑ नम॒न्ते -> to him, all the ritus bow down, they all worship him, Namante and Brahmana apnoti, he attains the Brahmanatvam 

य ए॑वं-वेँ॒द , the one who knows. Yaha, evam, like this, like what has been explained, Veda. Who knows. Yaha, who, whoever evam thus, Veda knows. Who thus knows, he will attain the Brahmanatvam.

So, these lines three to six, in essence, says that the person who thus knows about all the ritus mentioned so far with their characteristics, who understand that these are all from the Kalasvarupi, the sun, will be worshiped by all these ruthus, and he becomes a brahmana.

स खलु सं​वँथ्सर एतै-स्सेनानी॑भि-स्स॒ह । 
saha here refers to the Sun God. khalu -> indeed, samavataraha -> kaalasvarupi, etaih -> with these ruthus;
etaih senanibih -> these leaders, like we saw them - the astavasus we saw them, we saw the adityas - the dwadasha adityas, we saw about the ekadasa rudras. So all these adidevatas we keep explaining in these ruthus before. Saha -> with all of them together,

इन्द्राय सर्वान्-कामान॑भिव॒हति । 
Here indraya -> means the one who has got all his senses under control - the brahamana - the person who has reached that state; that person, sarvaan kaaman - all desires, abivahati - the sun brings to him - he is satisfied
