गुरुर्ब्रह्मा गुरुर्विष्णुः
गुरुर्देवो महेश्वरः ।
गुरुः साक्षात्परब्रह्म
तस्मै श्रीगुरवे नमः ॥
गुरवे सर्वलोकानां भिषजे भवरोगिणाम् ।
निधये सर्वविद्यानां दक्षिणामूर्तये नमः ॥
अस्मिन् गुरु चरणारविन्दाभ्याम् नमः।​, 

We have seen up to 18 panchati so far, so we are in the sixth annuvakam, 19th panchati. 

Let us read the panchati first. 

अव॑ द्र॒फ्सो अग्ं॑श॒मती॑मतिष्ठत् । इ॒या॒नः कृ॒ष्णो द॒शभिः॑ स॒हस्रैः᳚ । 
आव॒र्त-मिन्द्र॒-श्शच्या॒ धम॑न्तम् । उपस्नुहि त-न्नृमणा-मथ॑द्रामि॒ति । 
एतयै वेन्द्र-स्सला वृ॑क्या स॒ह । असुरा-न्प॑रिवृ॒श्चति । 
पृथि॑व्य॒ग्ं॒ शुम॑ती । ताम॒न्व-व॑स्थित-स्सं​वँथ्स॒रो दि॒वञ्च॑ । 
नैवं-विँदुषा-ऽऽचार्या᳚-न्तेवा॒सिनौ । अन्योन्यस्मै᳚ द्रुह्या॒ताम् । 
यो द्रु॒ह्यति । भ्रश्यते स्व॑र्गा-ल्लो॒कात् । इत्यृतु म॑ण्डला॒नि । 
सूर्य मण्डला᳚ न्याख्या॒यिकाः । अत ऊर्ध्वग्ंस॑निर्व॒चनाः ॥ 19 ॥

Let us look at the meaning of this panchadi. 

अव॑ द्र॒फ्सो अग्ं॑श॒मती॑मतिष्ठत्
Ava means Ava here means down.. downward.. 
ava drapsaha -> literally the drop of waters, drapsaha. Avadhrapsaha means the drop, the water drops, the falling water drops. 
Avadhrap saha, rain, which is rain here. 
Avadhapsaha means rain. 
Amsumatim, amsumatim means earth. Amsumathi is earth. Earth. atishtat. The water drops reach. Atishtat means reached. 
The waters that is coming down through the rain reach the earth. 

अव॑ द्र॒फ्सो अग्ं॑श॒मती॑मतिष्ठत्. 
The waters reach the earth. 

इ॒या॒नः कृ॒ष्णो द॒शभिः॑ स॒हस्रैः᳚
iyana iyanaha means these waters that are flowing, flowing, going. 
Yanaha flowing waters, gushing, gushing waters. Krishnah means the land that is ready for farming, the ready for farming, the land that is ready for farming. 
Krishna, द॒शभिः॑ स॒हस्रैः᳚ dasa bihi 10s of 10s in 10s, sagastrehi 1000s, 10s of 1000s of streams. 
The water that came down, you know, that reached the earth, flows, iyanah flows in 10s of 1000s of streams and reaches the earth, and that reaches the farms that are ready for farming, or the land are ready for farming. 

आव॒र्त-मिन्द्र॒-श्शच्या॒ धम॑न्तम् 
Avartam means again and again. So we we ask that question, right? 
Avatam means again and again, repeating again and again. 
Indra, Lord Indra, Sachyaa with his powers. Sachya means Sakti with his powers, the powers, the capacity that he has. 
Satya, 
Damantam, Damantam. Damantam means thunderstorms, thunder, thunders. 
आव॒र्त-मिन्द्र॒-श्शच्या॒ धम॑न्तम्  means Indra, by his might, by his capacity, by his might, bring the clouds with thunder, with thunder again and again, our thumb again and again. 
He brings the clouds again and again. 

उपस्नुहि त-न्नृमणा-मथ॑द्रामि॒ति 
upasnuhi upasnuhi means he makes it come down the rain. 
He brings the rain indra. He brings the rain tham that.. means that. 
That here means the waters. Tam that waters. Nirmanam. 
Nirmanam means farmmen. Famrmers who are expecting the rain. 
The farmers, basically. The men who are expecting those rains. 
Attat dram. Ataddram means flowing down, flowing down towards the earth. 
Ava, we saw then the first slogan, ava, avadrapsaha same meaning. Atad dram flowing down. Ithi it is said. Thus it is said. Iti. 
So Indra, with his might, brings the waters down to earth from the clouds, the thunderous clouds, through the downpour of rains as rain. 
The water comes down as rains from the clouds, which are expected by the men, expected by the men, Nurmannam, who are expecting those rains. He brings them down. 
Upasnu, he Indra brings them down, and thus it is said. 
It is said, explained in the following verses. We are going to explain more about this in the following verses. 

एतयै वेन्द्र-स्सला वृ॑क्या स॒ह
etaya etaya indra etaya etay et. etay vendra. So etaya eva indra. 
Etaya means with this, that is with the earth, with the earth. 
Etaya, eva indeed, only eva indrah indradevata, salavrkya. 
Salavarkya means that drinks water. Salavarkya is that that is that expects water that drinks water, which is earth. 
Etaya, the earth who which needs water for farming for everything. Right? 
We need water on the earth. Salavarkya, sah together with saha together. 
so Indra, the rain god, for the earth, this etaya, for this earth, what kind of earth? 
Salavarikya that expects or that needs water. 
Indra, the rain god, for the earth which needs the water, 


असुरा-न्प॑रिवृ॒श्चति 
asuran asuran. 
Here, you have to be very careful here. This is not asuraha. Asuraha are asuras the evil forces, asura.
Here it is, asuran, asurana. Here, the asu. 
Asu means clouds. Asu clouds. Or the pranas. The pranas are called asu is for the pranas, the force that sustains the jivas, pranas, 
asur, and asuran here is the clouds because the clouds are considered as a adharam for the pranas because they give us the rainwater, which is essential for the jivas to live. 
So the asuran here represents the clouds, the rain clouds. 
Pari Vraschati, Pari Vraschadi, he sends them. Indra sends them to all directions so that entire earth can be covered. 
So Indra sends those rain clouds in all directions. That's what. So connect with the previous mantra, Indra, the rain god, to the earth or for the earth, which needs water. 
He sends those clouds on all directions. That's what these two lines mean. 

एतयै वेन्द्र-स्सला वृ॑क्या स॒ह । असुरा-न्प॑रिवृ॒श्चति । 
पृथि॑व्य॒ग्ं॒ शुम॑ती
Prithivi means earth, Prithivi the earth, amsumati,
now call as amsumati Why? Because with the rains, all the herbs and plants grow on earth. 
So now it comes Amsumati. She is called Amsumadhi. The earth thus becomes Amsumati with the with the rain that was sent by Lord Indra. 

ताम॒न्व-व॑स्थित-स्सं​वँथ्स॒रो दि॒वञ्च॑ ।
tam the earth tam the earth; anvavastita -> established / situated literally that was mean established anvavasta -> Established or situated,
samvadsaraha, samvatsharah means the year, the ear or yearlong year, or here the bashikara says the samvathsaraha here indicates the kalasvarupi, the sun, the sun god is represented here as with with this word samvatsaraha, divancha and the heavens, tham the earth, divancha and the heavens are established, established sun establishes. Sun the Kala svarupi, thus touches / is established between the earth and the heavens. 
In other words, it says sun is responsible for the rain that reaches the earth from the sky, from the heaven or akasa. 
Here it is akasha From the sky, it reaches down the earth, and because of the sun, because of the Kalasrupi, the Samvatsaraha, the adhisthana Devata of the Samvatsara is sun. 
So he is indirectly responsible for the rain that reaches the earth. That's what this means. 

नैवं-विँदुषा-ऽऽचार्या᳚-न्तेवा॒सिनौ । 
naivam means na evam. That is naivam na not evam. Thus vidusha. Vidusha. One who knows, one who knows, Vidusha. Acharya, the teacher, Antevasi nau, the student. 
Antevasinah means the student who lives in the Gurukula, literally residing student, the student who resides with the teacher is called Antevasinau. Acharya Antevasinau.
So literally, it says a teacher and the and the student who understood this, what understood what, that son is responsible for the rain, but who has understood Sun as the Devata, Who is responsible for this, For this, all these, all these ritus. So far, that we explained all this knowledge. One who knows this. One who knows this. 

अन्योन्यस्मै᳚ द्रुह्या॒ताम् । 
Anyonyasmay. Anyonyaasmay means towards one another. Anyonyasmai towards one another. Drishyataam. 
Dryadam means acting treacherously, harmful. Those kind of acts. 

So connect with the previous sentence now. 

नैवं-विँदुषा-ऽऽचार्या᳚-न्तेवा॒सिनौ । अन्योन्यस्मै᳚ द्रुह्या॒ताम् । the one who has understood sun as the Kalasvarupi, who is the devata, who is responsible for all the rutus that we have seen so far, and who is responsible for the rains, the waters, who has understood thus both the student and the teacher, should not- it's a naevam, right? We saw that in the previous line. So, anonymous made towards each other should not act treacherously or should not harm each other. That's what these two lines mean. They should not harm each other.

नैवं-विँदुषा-ऽऽचार्या᳚-न्तेवा॒सिनौ । अन्योन्यस्मै᳚ द्रुह्या॒ताम् । 
Anyonya smi nadrhyatham from the previous line naivam na evam. It says you have to connect the na here. Na drich yatam should not harm each other. Should not harm each other. Act treacherously towards each other.

यो द्रु॒ह्यति 
What happens if they do? Yo, yah. Whoever drikhyati who acts in a harmful way, who acts or who causes harms to others, 

भ्रश्यते स्व॑र्गा-ल्लो॒कात् 
brashyate, he falls away, he falls from the heavens, swargal lokat, from the heavenly world, he will fall means he gets papam. He attains papam. He will not reach swarga, swargaloka. 

इत्यृतु म॑ण्डला॒नि । 
ithi rtumandalani itrutumandalani ithi rutumandali. Thus, on the ruta mandalas or rutus - surya mandala anyakya yikaha surya mandalani in the solar mandalam the rutus in the solar cycles akyayikaha explained thus explained / narrated atkyayika. The solar cycles, the ruthus in the solar mandalam has thus been narrated or explained until this 19th panchati. 

अत ऊर्ध्वग्ंस॑निर्व॒चनाः ॥ 19 ॥
atha from hereafter henceforth. urdhvam above hoodum means above, meaning going forward of hereafter in the following verses, urdhvam, sa nirvachanaha nirvachanah are mantras mantras sa nirvachanaha.
With more explanation or more explanations or with more context is going to be explained hereafter.

So we are going to see other aspects of the sun in the following verses. That's what it is said, atah uurdhvam sanir vachanaah explaining the sun as the kalaswarupi ends with this Panchadi. The 6th anuvakam ends here. 

So in the first 6 anuvaaka in this Aruna Prashnam, it has explained how the sun is responsible for these kala chakras and here after it is going to change topic and going to explain more about sun and it concludes all these rtu explanations and how sun was responsible for getting all the waters to earth. So we will more explanations in the next recording. Also before I start the 7th anuvakam I will summarize all the 6 anuvakams and then we will go into the 7th anuvakam.

ॐ पूर्णमदः पूर्णमिदं पूर्णात्पूर्णमुदच्यते ।
पूर्णस्य पूर्णमादाय पूर्णमेवावशिष्यते ॥
ॐ शान्तिः शान्तिः शान्तिः ॥
हरिः ॐ । ॐ श्री गुरुभ्यो नमः। हरिः ॐ ।

