In my previous recording on Mahasankalpam, I forgot to highlight that in the Mahasankalpam, there is also a clear mention of the names of seven Kalpas.
Um, and those are Parthiva, Kurma, Pralayananta, Shweta Varaha, Brahma, and Savitri.
These are the seven, um, Kalpas that are mentioned there.
And of that, we are in Shweta Varaha Kalpe.
Okay.

And also the mention of the, um, Manvantaras, and we have also talked about it in the, uh, Laghu Sankalpam, uh, podcast.
Uh, so like Swayambhuva, Swarochisha, Uttama, Tamasa, Raivata, Chakshusha, and Vaivasvata.
So these are the Manvantaras and the corresponding, uh, rulers or kings at that time.

And further, another thing that I want to highlight is there are different kinds of time measurements, uh, using different, uh, you know, natural phenomena or, uh, starting from, you know, very cosmic level to, uh, kind of down to earth things.
So here you will see, uh, that is also listed here.
Okay.

And they are Brahma, Daiva, Pitrya, for Pitr, Prajapatya, Barhaspatya, Saura, Chandra, Savana, and Nakshatra.
So these are the nine, uh, ways of measurement.
And here, for example, the Barhaspatya means it is based on Brihaspati, uh, which also means that time is measured, uh, using Jupiter as the basis.

So in that case, uh, the way it would appear is, uh, when Jupiter goes around the earth one, uh, revolution, that would be considered as one year.
And, uh, there is also, uh, Devamanam, uh, that is what is referred to here as Daiva.
Uh, and we also know the Brahma Manam because we said that, you know, one year is equal to, you know, so many Chatur Yugas and so on.

So that is also a kind of measurement, right?
So Brahma is one of the ways of measuring.
Uh, Devamanam is another way.
Pitrumanam is another way, Prajapatya is another way and so on.

So of that, uh, we are, uh, in our Laghu Sankalpam or Mahasankalpam, we use, uh, Saura Chandramana Dwayena.
That is what is mentioned here.
And like I explained last time, we are specifying both.

That is we, uh, tell the, the Masam, uh, either in Sauramanam or Chandramanam or both.
And then the other things like, you know, Paksham, uh, these are essentially, uh, coming from Chandramanam.
Paksham, Nakshatram, etcetera.

Whereas the Vasaram comes basically from Sauramanam again.
So there is a clear mention here as to what method you are using, uh, to, uh, specify.
So Saura Chandramana Dwayena Pravartamane Prabhavadi.

So Prabha, Prabha is the first year in the names of the list of years which go from, uh, Prabha to there are 60 names.
Maybe, uh, I can list them out in the, uh, next podcast.
And within that, we are in Vishwavasu Samvatsaram.

So I just wanted to highlight, uh, these, uh, points here.
Thank you